




[Illustration: Plate 1.

Repton Church.]




                                  REPTON
                          AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD:

                          A DESCRIPTIVE GUIDE OF
                  THE ARCHÆOLOGY, &c., OF THE DISTRICT.

                   _Illustrated by Photogravures, &c._

                                    BY
                       F. C. HIPKINS, M.A., F.S.A.,
                    ASSISTANT MASTER AT REPTON SCHOOL.

                             SECOND EDITION.

                     A. J. LAWRENCE, PRINTER, REPTON.
                                MDCCCXCIX.

                                 REPTON:
                         A. J. LAWRENCE, PRINTER.




PREFACE.


In the year 1892, I ventured to write, for Reptonians, a short History
of Repton, its quick sale emboldened me to set about obtaining materials
for a second edition. The list of Authors, &c., consulted (printed at
the end of this preface), will enable any one, who wishes to do so, to
investigate the various events further, or to prove the truth of the
facts recorded. Round the Church, Priory, and School centre all that is
interesting, and, naturally, they occupy nearly all the pages of this
second attempt to supply all the information possible to those who live
in, or visit our old world village, whose church, &c., might well have
served the poet Gray as the subject of his Elegy.

    “Beneath those rugged Elms, that Yew-tree’s shade,
    Where heaves the Turf in many a mould’ring Heap,
    Each in his narrow Cell for ever laid,
    The rude Forefathers of the Hamlet sleep.”

In writing the history of Repton certain events stand out more
prominently than others, _e. g._, the Conversion of Mercia by Diuma,
its first bishop, and his assistant missionaries, Adda, Betti, and
Cedda, the brother of St. Chad: the Founding of the Monastery during
the reign of Peada or his brother Wulphere (A.D. 655-675): the coming
of the Danes in 874, and the destruction of the Abbey and town by them:
the first building of Repton Church, probably during the reign of Edgar
the Peaceable, A.D. 957: the Founding of the Priory by Maud, Countess of
Chester, about the year 1150, its dissolution in 1538, its destruction
in 1553, and the Founding of the School in 1557. Interwoven with these
events are others which have been recorded in the Chronicles, Histories,
Registers, &c., consulted, quoted, and used to produce as interesting an
account as possible of those events, which extend over a period of nearly
twelve hundred and fifty years!

The hand of time, and man, especially the latter, has gradually destroyed
anything ancient, and “restorations” have completely changed the aspect
of the village. The Church, Priory, Hall, and “Cross,” still serve as
links between the centuries, but, excepting these, only one old house
remains, in Well Lane, bearing initials “T.S.” and date “1686.”

Even the Village Cross was restored! Down to the year 1806, the shaft
was square, with square capital, in which an iron cross was fixed. In
Bigsby’s History of Repton, (p. 261), there is a drawing of it, and an
account of its restoration, by the Rev. R. R. Rawlins.

During the last fifteen years the old house which stood at the corner,
(adjoining Mr. Cattley’s house,) in which the “_Court Leet_” was
held, and the “round-house” at the back of the Post Office, with its
octagonal-shaped walls and roof, and oak door, studded with iron nails,
have also been destroyed.

The consequence is that the History of Repton is chiefly concerned with
ancient and mediæval times.

The Chapters on the Neighbourhood of Repton have been added in the hope
that they may prove useful to those who may wish to make expeditions to
the towns and villages mentioned. More might have been included, and more
written about them, the great difficulty was to curtail both, and at
the same time make an interesting, and intelligible record of the chief
points of interest in the places described.

In conclusion, I wish to return thanks to those who by their advice, and
information have helped me, especially the Rev. J. Charles Cox, LL.D.,
Author of “Derbyshire Churches,” &c., J. T. Irvine, Esq., and Messrs.
John Thompson and Sons who most kindly supplied me with plans of Crypt,
and Church, made during the restorations of 1885-6.

For the many beautiful photographs, my best thanks are due to Miss M. H.
Barham, W. B. Hawkins, Esq., and C. B. Hutchinson, Esq., and others.




BOOKS, ETC., CONSULTED OR QUOTED.


Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, (Rolls Series).

Bassano, Francis. Church Notes, (1710).

Bede, Venerable. Ecclesiastical History.

Bigsby, Rev. Robert. History of Repton, (1854).

Birch, W. de Gray. Memorials of St. Guthlac.

Browne, (Right Rev. Bishop of Bristol). Conversion of the Heptarchy.

Cox, Rev. J. Charles. Churches of Derbyshire.

Derbyshire Archæological Journal, (1879-98).

Eckenstein, Miss Lina. Women under Monasticism.

Diocesan Histories, (S.P.C.K).

Dugdale. Monasticon.

Evesham, Chronicles of, (Rolls Series).

Gentleman’s Magazine.

Glover, S. History of Derbyshire, (1829).

Green, J. R. Making of England.

Ingulph. History.

Leland. Collectanea.

Lingard. Anglo-Saxon Church.

Lysons. Magna Britannia, (Derbyshire), (1817).

Paris, Matthew. Chronicles, (Rolls Series).

Pilkington, J. “A View of the Present State of Derbyshire,” (1789).

Repton Church Registers.

Repton School Register.

Searle, W. G. Onomasticon Anglo-Saxonicum.

Stebbing Shaw. History of Staffordshire.

” ” Topographer.

Tanner. Notitia Monastica.




CONTENTS.


                                                                     _page_

    LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS                                               ix

                               CHAPTER I.

    Repton (General)                                                     1

                               CHAPTER II.

    Repton (Historical)—The place-name Repton, &c.                       6

                              CHAPTER III.

    Repton’s Saints (Guthlac and Wystan)                                11

                               CHAPTER IV.

    Repton Church                                                       17

                               CHAPTER V.

    Repton Church Registers                                             25

                               CHAPTER VI.

    Repton’s Merry Bells                                                42

                              CHAPTER VII.

    The Priory                                                          50

                              CHAPTER VIII.

    Repton School                                                       61

                               CHAPTER IX.

    Repton School _v._ Gilbert Thacker                                  65

                               CHAPTER X.

    Repton Tile-Kiln                                                    71

                               CHAPTER XI.

    Repton School Tercentenary and Founding of the School Chapel, &c.   75

                              CHAPTER XII.

    School Houses, &c.                                                  81

                              CHAPTER XIII.

    Chief Events referred to, or described                              87

                              CHAPTER XIV.

                       THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF REPTON.                     91

    Ashby-de-la-Zouch                                                   92

    Barrow, Swarkeston, and Stanton-by-Bridge                           99

    Bretby and Hartshorn                                               104

    Egginton, Stretton, and Tutbury                                    108

    Etwall and its Hospital                                            115

    Foremark and Anchor Church                                         121

    Melbourne and Breedon                                              124

    Mickle-Over, Finderne, and Potlac                                  127

    Newton Solney                                                      130

    Tickenhall, Calke, and Staunton Harold                             132

    INDEX                                                              137




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


  _Plate_

     1. Repton Church                                        _frontispiece_

     2. Prior Overton’s Tower                             _to face page_ 1

     3. Repton Church Crypt                                     ”       17

     4. Repton Camp and Church                                  ”       22

     5. Plans of Church and Priory                              ”       25

     6. Bell Marks                                              ”       46

     7. Repton Priory                                           ”       51

     8. Sir John Porte and Gilbert Thacker                      ”       54

     9. The Outer Arch of Gate House                            ”       61

    10. Repton School Chapel and Mr. Exham’s House              ”       75

    11. The Hall and Porter’s Lodge                             ”       81

    12. Pears Memorial Hall Window                              ”       83

    13. Mr. Cattley’s, Mr. Forman’s and Mr. Gould’s Houses      ”       85

    14. Mr. Estridge’s and Mr. Gurney’s Houses                  ”       86

    15. Cricket Pavilion, Pears Memorial Hall, &c.              ”       90

    16. Ashby Castle and Staunton Harold Church                 ”       93

    17. Barrow Church and Swarkeston House                      ”       99

    18. Anchor Church and Bretby Hall                           ”      104

    19. Egginton Church and Willington Church                   ”      109

    20. Etwall Church and Hospital                              ”      115

    21. Breedon Church and Melbourne Church                     ”      125

    22. Tickenhall Round House                                  ”      136




CORRIGENDA.


    Page 12. _For_ Eaburgh    _read_ Eadburgh.
     ”   14.   ”   Ggga         ”    Egga.
     ”   74.   ”   Solwey       ”    Solney.
     ”   96.   ”   Grindley     ”    Grinling.
     ”   99.   ”   preceptary   ”    preceptory.
     ”  111.   ”   now          ”    father of the.
     ”  115.   ”   Bumaston     ”    Burnaston.

Transcriber’s Note: These corrections have been made to the text.




[Illustration: Plate 2.

Repton Hall. (Prior Overton’s Tower, page 81.)]




CHAPTER I.

REPTON (GENERAL).


Repton is a village in the County of Derby, four miles east of
Burton-on-Trent, seven miles south-west of Derby, and gives its name to
the deanery, and with Gresley, forms the hundred, or division, to which
it belongs.

The original settlers showed their wisdom when they selected the site: on
the north flowed “the smug and silver Trent,” providing them with water;
whilst on the south, forests, which then, no doubt, extended in unbroken
line from Sherwood to Charnwood, provided fuel; and, lying between, a
belt of green pasturage provided fodder for cattle and sheep. The hand
of time and man, has nearly destroyed the forests, leaving them such in
name alone, and the remains of forests and pasturage have been “annexed.”
Repton _Common_ still remains in name, in 1766 it was enclosed by Act of
Parliament, and it and the woods round are no longer “common.”

Excavations made in the Churchyard, and in the field to the west of it,
have laid bare many foundations, and portions of Anglo-Saxon buildings,
such as head-stones of doorways and windows, which prove that the site
of the ancient Monastery, and perhaps the town, was on that part of the
village now occupied by church, churchyard, vicarage and grounds, and was
protected by the River Trent, a branch of which then, no doubt, flowed
at the foot of its rocky bank. At some time unknown, the course of the
river was interfered with. Somewhere, above or about the present bridge
at Willington, the river divided into two streams, one flowing as it does
now, the other, by a very sinuous course, crossed the fields and flowed
by the town, and so on till it rejoined the Trent above Twyford Ferry.
Traces of this bed can be seen in the fields, and there are still three
wide pools left which lie in the course of what is now called the “Old
Trent.”

There is an old tradition that this alteration was made by Hotspur. In
Shakespeare’s play of _Henry IV. Act III._ Hotspur, Worcester, Mortimer,
and Glendower, are at the house of the Archdeacon at Bangor. A map of
England and Wales is before them, which the Archdeacon has divided into
three parts. Mortimer is made to say:

    “England, from Trent to Severn hitherto,
    By south and east is to my part assign’d:
    All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
    And all the fertile land within that bound,
    To Owen Glendower; and dear Coz, to you
    The remnant northward, lying off from Trent.”

The “dear Coz” Hotspur, evidently displeased with his share, replies,
pointing to the map;—

    “Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here,
    In quantity equals not one of yours:
    See how this river comes me cranking in,
    And cuts me from the best of all my land,
    A huge half moon, a monstrous cantle out.
    _I’ll have the current in this place damm’d up;_
    _And here the smug and silver Trent shall run_
    _In a new channel fair and evenly:_
    _It shall not wind with such a deep indent,_
    _To rob me of so rich a bottom here.”_

Whether this passage refers to the alteration of the course of the
Trent at Repton, or not, we cannot say, but that it was altered is an
undoubted fact. The dam can be traced just below the bridge, and on
the Parish Map, the junction of the two is marked. Pilkington in his
History of Derbyshire refers to “eight acres of land _in an island
betwixt Repton and Willington_” as belonging to the Canons of Repton
Priory. They are still known as the Canons’ Meadows. On this “island” is
a curious parallelogram of raised earth, which is _supposed to be_ the
remains of a Roman Camp, called Repandunum by Stebbing-Shaw, O.R., the
Historian of Staffordshire, but he gives no proofs for the assertion.
Since the “Itineraries” neither mention nor mark it, its original makers
must remain doubtful until excavations have been made on the spot. Its
dimensions are, North side, 75 yards, 1 foot, South side, 68 yards, 1
foot, East side, 52 yards, 1 foot, West side, 54 yards, 2 feet. Within
the four embankments are two rounded mounds, and parallel with the South
side are two inner ramparts, only one parallel with the North. It is
supposed by some to be “a sacred area surrounding tumuli.” The local
name for it is “The Buries.” In my opinion it was raised and used by the
Danes, who in A.D. 874 visited Repton, and destroyed it before they left
in A.D. 875.

Before the Conquest the Manor of Repton belonged to Algar, Earl of
Mercia. In Domesday Book it is described as belonging to him and the
King, having a church and two priests, and two mills. It soon after
belonged to the Earls of Chester, one of whom, Randulph de Blundeville,
died in the year 1153. His widow, Matilda, with the consent of her son
Hugh, founded Repton Priory.

In Lysons’ _Magna Britannia_, we read, “The Capital Messuage of Repingdon
was taken into the King’s (Henry III.) hands in 1253.” Afterwards it
appears to have passed through many hands, John de Britannia, William de
Clinton, Philip de Strelley, John Fynderne, etc., etc. In the reign of
Henry IV., John Fynderne “was seised of an estate called the Manor of
Repingdon _alias_ Strelley’s part,” from whom it descended through George
Fynderne to Jane Fynderne, who married Sir Richard Harpur, Judge of the
Common Pleas, whose tomb is in the mortuary chapel of the Harpurs in
Swarkeston Church. Round the alabaster slab of the tomb on which lie the
effigies of Sir Richard and his wife, is the following inscription, “Here
under were buryed the bodyes of Richard Harpur, one of the Justicies of
the Comen Benche at Westminster, and Jane his wife, sister and heyer unto
Thomas Fynderne of Fynderne, Esquyer. Cogita Mori.” Since the dissolution
of the Priory there have been two Manors of Repton, Repton Manor and
Repton Priory Manor.

From Sir Richard Harpur the Manor of Repton descended to the present
Baronet, Sir Vauncey Harpur-Crewe. Sir Henry Harpur, by royal license,
assumed the name and arms of Crewe, in the year 1800.

The Manor of Repton Priory passed into the hands of the Thackers at the
dissolution of the Priory, and remained in that family till the year
1728, when Mary Thacker devised it, and other estates, to Sir Robert
Burdett of Foremark, Bart.

The Village consists of two main streets, which meet at the Cross.
Starting from the Church, in a southerly direction, one extends for
about a mile, towards Bretby. The other, coming from Burton-on-Trent,
proceeds in an easterly direction, through “Brook End,” towards Milton,
and Tickenhall, &c. The road from Willington was made in 1839, when it
and the bridge were completed, and opened to the public. A swift stream,
rising in the Pistern Hills, six miles to the south, runs through a broad
valley, and used to turn four corn mills, (two of which are mentioned
in Domesday Book,) now only two are worked, one at Bretby, the other
at Repton. The first, called Glover’s Mill, about a mile above Bretby,
has the names of many of the Millers, who used to own or work it, cut,
apparently, by their own hands, in the stone of which it is built.
The last mill was the Priory Mill, and stood on the east side of the
Priory, the arch, through which the mill-race ran, is still _in situ_,
it was blocked, and the stream diverted to its present course, by Sir
John Harpur in the year 1606. On the left bank of this stream, on the
higher ground of the valley, the village has been built; no attempt at
anything like uniformity of design, in shape or size, has been made,
each owner and builder erected, house or cottage, according to his own
idea or desire; these, with gardens and orchards, impart an air of
quaint beauty to our village, whose inhabitants for centuries have been
engaged, chiefly, in agriculture. In the old Parish registers some of its
inhabitants are described as “websters,” and “tanners,” but, owing to
the growth of the trade in better situated towns, these trades gradually
ceased.

During the Civil War the inhabitants of Repton and neighbourhood remained
loyal and faithful to King Charles I. In 1642 Sir John Gell, commander of
the Parliamentary forces stormed Bretby House, and in January, 1643, the
inhabitants of Repton, and other parishes, sent a letter of remonstrance
to the Mayor and Corporation of Derby, owing to the plundering excursions
of soldiers under Sir John’s command. In the same year, Sir John Harpur’s
house, at Swarkeston, was stormed and taken by Sir John Gell.

In 1687 a wonderful skeleton, nine feet long! was discovered in a field,
called Allen’s Close, adjoining the churchyard of Repton, now part of the
Vicarage grounds. The skeleton was in a stone coffin, with others to the
number of one hundred arranged round it! During the year 1787 the grave
was reopened, and a confused heap of bones was discovered, which were
covered over with earth, and a sycamore tree, which is still flourishing,
was planted to mark the spot.

During the present century few changes have been made in the village;
most of them will be found recorded, either under chief events in the
History of Repton, or in the chapters succeeding.




CHAPTER II.

REPTON (HISTORICAL). THE PLACE-NAME REPTON, &c.


The first mention of Repton occurs in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,
under the year 755. Referring to “the slaughter” of King Ethelbald,
King of Mercia, one out of the six MSS. relates that it happened “on
Hreopandune,” “at Repton”; the other five have “on Seccandune,” “at
Seckington,” near Tamworth. Four of the MSS. spell the name “Hrepandune,”
one “Hreopadune,” and one “Reopandune.”

Under the year 874, when the Danes came from Lindsey, Lincolnshire, to
Repton, “and there took winter quarters,” four of the MSS. spell the
name “Hreopedune,” one “Hreopendune.” Again, under the year 875, when
they left, having destroyed the Abbey and the town, the name is spelt
“Hreopedune.” The final _e_ represents the dative case. In Domesday
Book it is spelt “Rapendune,” “Rapendvne,” or “Rapendvn.” In later
times, among the various ways of spelling the name, the following
occur:—Hrypadun, Rypadun, Rapandun, Rapindon, Rependon, Repindon,
Repingdon, Repyndon, Repington, Repyngton, Ripington, Rippington,
&c., and finally Repton; the final syllable _ton_ being, of course, a
corruption of the ancient _dun_ or _don_.

Now as to the meaning of the name. There is no doubt about the suffix
_dun_, which was adopted by the Anglo-Saxons from the Celts, and means _a
hill_, and was generally used to denote a hill-fortress, stronghold, or
fortified place. As to the meaning of the prefix “Hreopan,” “Hreopen,”
or “Repen,” the following suggestions have been made:—(1) “Hreopan” is
the genitive case of a Saxon proper name, “Hreopa,” and means Hreopa’s
hill, or hill-fortress. (2) “Hropan or Hreopan,” a verb, “to shout,” or
“proclaim”; or a noun, “Hrop,” “clamour,” or “proclamation,” and so may
mean “the hill of shouting, clamour, or proclamation.” (3) “Repan or
Ripan,” a verb, “to reap” or a noun, “Rep, or Rip,” a harvest, “the hill
of reaping or harvest.” (4) “Hreppr,” a Norse noun for “a village,” “a
village on a hill.” (5) “Ripa,” a noun meaning “a bank,” “a hill on a
bank,” of the river Trent, which flows close to it.

The question is, which of these is the most probable meaning? The first
three seem to suit the place and position. It is a very common thing for
a hill or place to bear the name of the owner or occupier. As Hreopandun
was the capital of Mercia, many a council may have been held, many a law
may have been proclaimed, and many a fight may have been fought, with
noise and clamour, upon its hill, and, in peaceful times, a harvest may
have been reaped upon it, and the land around. As regards the two last
suggestions, the arrival of the Norsemen, in the eighth century, would be
too late for them to name a place which had probably been in existence,
as an important town, for nearly two centuries before they came.

The prefix “ripa” seems to favour a Roman origin, but no proofs of a
Roman occupation can be found. If there are any, they lie hid beneath
that oblong enclosure in a field to the north of Repton, near the banks
of the river Trent, which Stebbing Shaw, in the _Topographer_ (Vol. II.,
p. 250), says “was an ancient colony of the Romans called ‘Repandunum.’”
As the name does not appear in any of the “Itineraries,” nor in any of
the minor settlements or camps in Derbyshire, this statement is extremely
doubtful. Most probably the camp was constructed by the Danes when they
wintered there in the year 874. The name Repandunum appears in Spruner
and Menke’s “Atlas Antiquus” as a town among the Cornavii (? Coritani),
at the junction of the Trent and Dove!

So far as to its name. Now we will put together the various historical
references to it.

“This place,” writes Stebbing Shaw, (O.R.), in the _Topographer_, Vol.
II., p. 250, “was an ancient colony of the Romans called Repandunum, and
was afterwards called Repandun, (Hreopandum,) by the Saxons, being the
head of the Mercian kingdom, several of their kings having palaces here.”

“Here was, before A.D. 600, a noble monastery of religious men and women,
under the government of an Abbess, after the Saxon Way, wherein several
of the royal line were buried.”

As no records of the monastery have been discovered we cannot tell where
it was founded or by whom. Penda, the Pagan King of Mercia, was slain
by Oswiu, king of Northumbria, at the battle of Winwadfield, in the
year 656, and was succeeded by his son Peada who had been converted to
Christianity, by Alfred brother of Oswiu, and was baptized, with all his
attendants, by Finan, bishop of Lindisfarne, at Walton, in the year 632.
(_Matt. Paris, Chron. Maj._) After Penda’s death, Peada brought from the
north, to convert Mercia, four priests, Adda, Betti, Cedda brother of St.
Chad, and Diuma, who was consecrated first bishop of the Middle Angles
and Mercians by Finan, but only ruled the see for two years, when he died
and was buried “among the Middle Angles at Feppingum,” which is supposed
to be Repton. In the year 657 Peada was slain “in a very nefarious
manner, during the festival of Easter, betrayed, as some say, by his
wife,” and was succeeded by his brother Wulphere.

Tanner, _Notitia_, f. 78; Leland, _Collect._, Vol. II., p. 157; Dugdale,
_Monasticon_, Vol. II., pp. 280-2, all agree that the monastery was
founded before 660, so Peada, or his brother Wulphere could have been its
founder.

The names of several of the Abbesses have been recorded. Eadburh,
daughter of Ealdwulf, King of East Anglia. Ælfthryth (Ælfritha) who
received Guthlac, (see p. 12). Wærburh (St. Werburgh) daughter of King
Wulphere. Cynewaru (Kenewara) who in 835 granted the manor and lead mines
of Wirksworth, on lease, to one Humbert.

Among those whom we know to have been buried within the monastery are
Merewald, brother of Wulphere. Cyneheard, brother of the King of the West
Saxons. Æthelbald, King of the Mercians, “slain at Seccandun (Seckington,
near Tamworth), and his body lies at Hreopandun” (_Anglo-Saxon Chron._)
under date 755. Wiglaf or Withlaf, another King of Mercia, and his
grandson Wistan (St. Wystan), murdered by his cousin Berfurt at
Wistanstowe in 850 (see p. 15). After existing for over 200 years the
monastery was destroyed by the Danes in the year 874. “In this year the
army of the Danes went from Lindsey (Lincolnshire) to Hreopedun, and
there took winter quarters,” (_Anglo-Saxon Chron._), and as Ingulph
relates “utterly destroyed that most celebrated monastery, the most
sacred mausoleum of all the Kings of Mercia.”

For over two hundred years it lay in ruins, till, probably, the days of
Edgar the Peaceable (958-75) when a church was built on the ruins, and
dedicated to St. Wystan.

When Canute was King (1016-1035) he transferred the relics of St. Wystan
to Evesham Abbey, where they rested till the year 1207, when, owing to
the fall of the central tower which smashed the shrine and relics, a
portion of them was granted to the Canons of Repton. (_see Life of St.
Wystan, p. 16._) In Domesday Book Repton is entered as having a Church
with _two_ priests, which proves the size and importance of the church
and parish in those early times. Algar, Earl of Mercia, son of Leofric,
and Godiva, was the owner then, but soon after, it passed into the hands
of the King, eventually it was restored to the descendants of Algar, the
Earls of Chester. Matilda, widow of Randulph, Earl of Chester, with the
consent of her son Hugh, enlarged the church, and founded the Priory,
both of which she granted to the Canons of Calke, whom she transferred to
Repton in the year 1172.




CHAPTER III.

REPTON’S SAINTS (GUTHLAC & WYSTAN).


“The sober recital of historical fact is decked with legends of singular
beauty, like artificial flowers adorning the solid fabric of the Church.
Truth and fiction are so happily blended that we cannot wish such holy
visions to be removed out of our sight,” thus wrote Bishop Selwyn of the
time when our Repton Saints lived, and in order that their memories may
be kept green, the following account has been written.


ST. GUTHLAC.

At the command of Æthelbald, King of the Mercians, Felix, monk of
Crowland, first bishop of the East Angles, wrote a life of St. Guthlac.

He derived his information from Wilfrid, abbot of Crowland, Cissa, a
priest, and Beccelm, the companion of Guthlac, all of whom knew him.

Felix relates that Guthlac was born in the days of Æthelred, (675-704),
his parents’ names were Icles and Tette, of royal descent. He was
baptised and named Guthlac, which is said to mean “Gud-lac,” “belli
munus,” “the gift of battle,” in reference to the gift of one, destined
to a military career, to the service of God. The sweet disposition of his
youth is described, at length, by his biographer, also the choice of a
military career, in which he spent nine years of his life. During those
years he devastated cities and houses, castles and villages, with fire
and sword, and gathered together an immense quantity of spoil, but he
returned a third part of it to those who owned it. One sleepless night,
his conscience awoke, the enormity of his crimes, and the doom awaiting
such a life, suddenly aroused him, at daybreak he announced, to his
companions, his intention of giving up the predatory life of a soldier of
fortune, and desired them to choose another leader, in vain they tried
to turn him from his resolve, and so at the age of twenty-four, about
the year 694, he left them, and came to the Abbey of Repton, and sought
admission there. Ælfritha, the abbess, admitted him, and, under her
rule, he received the “mystical tonsure of St. Peter, the prince of the
Apostles.”

For two years he applied himself to the study of sacred and monastic
literature.

The virtues of a hermit’s life attracted him, and he determined to adopt
it, so, in the autumn of 696, he again set out in search of a suitable
place, and soon lost himself among the fens, not far from Gronta—which
has been identified with Grantchester, near Cambridge—here, a bystander,
named Tatwine, mentioned a more remote island named Crowland, which many
had tried to inhabit, but, owing to monsters, &c., had failed to do so.
Hither Guthlac and Tatwine set out in a punt, and, landing on the island,
built a hut over a hole made by treasure seekers, in which Guthlac
settled on St. Bartholomew’s Day, (August 24th,) vowed to lead a hermit’s
life. Many stories are related, by Felix, of his encounters with evil
spirits, who tried to turn him away from the faith, or drive him away
from their midst.

Of course the miraculous element abounds all through the narrative,
chiefly connected with his encounters with evil spirits, whom he puts to
flight, delivering those possessed with them from their power. So great
was his fame, bishops, nobles, and kings, visit him, and Eadburgh, Abbess
of Repton, daughter of Aldulph, King of East Angles, sent him a shroud,
and a coffin of Derbyshire lead, for his burial, which took place on the
11th of April, A.D. 714.

Such, in briefest outline, is the life of St. Guthlac. Those who wish
to know more about him, should consult “The Memorials of St. Guthlac,”
edited by Walter de Gray Birch. In it he has given a list of the
manuscripts, Anglo-Saxon, Latin, and Old English Verse, which describe
the Saint’s life. He quotes specimens of all of them, and gives the full
text of Felix’s life, with footnotes of various readings, &c., and,
what is most interesting, has interleaved the life with illustrations,
reproduced by Autotype Photography, from the well known roll in Harley
Collection of MSS. in the British Museum. The roll, of vellum, is nine
feet long, by six inches and a half wide, on it are depicted, in circular
panels, eighteen scenes from the life of the Saint. Drawn with “brown
or faded black ink, heightened with tints and transparent colours,
lightly sketched in with a hair pencil—in the prevailing style of the
twelfth century—the work of a monk of Crowland, perhaps of the celebrated
Ingulph, the well known literary abbot of that monastery, it stands,
unique, in its place, as an example of the finest early English style of
freehand drawing,” one or more of the cartoons are missing.

The first cartoon, the left half of which is wanting, is a picture of
Guthlac and his companions asleep, clad in chain armour.

The 2nd. Guthlac takes leave of his companions.

The 3rd. Guthlac is kneeling between bishop Headda, and the abbess, in
Repton abbey. The bishop is shearing off Guthlac’s hair.

The 4th. Guthlac, Tatwine, and an attendant are in a boat with a sail,
making their way back to the island of Crowland.

The 5th. Guthlac, with two labourers, is building a chapel.

The 6th. Guthlac, seated in the completed chapel, receives a visit from
an angel, and his patron saint Bartholomew.

The 7th. Guthlac is borne aloft over the Chapel by five demons, three of
whom are beating him with triple-thonged whips. Beccelm, his companion,
is seated inside the Chapel, in front of the altar, on which is placed a
chalice.

The 8th. Guthlac, with a nimbus of sanctity round his head, has been
borne to the jaws of hell, (in which are a king, a bishop, and two
priests) by the demons, and is rescued by St. Bartholomew, who gives a
whip to Guthlac.

The 9th. The cell of Guthlac is surrounded by five demons, in various
hideous shapes. He has seized one, and is administering a good thrashing
with his whip.

The 10th. Guthlac expels a demon from the mouth of Egga, a follower of
the exiled Æthelbald.

The 11th. Guthlac, kneeling before bishop Headda, is ordained a priest.

The 12th. King Æthelbald visits Guthlac, both are seated, and Guthlac is
speaking words of comfort to him.

The 13th. Guthlac is lying ill in his oratory, Beccelm is kneeling in
front of him listening to his voice.

The 14th. Guthlac is dead, two angels are in attendance, one receiving
the soul, “anima”, as it issues from his mouth. A ray of light stretches
from heaven down to the face of the saint.

The 15th. Beccelm and an attendant in a boat, into which Pega, sister of
Guthlac, is stepping on her way to perform the obsequies of her brother.

The 16th. Guthlac, in his shroud, is being placed in a marble sarcophagus
by Pega and three others, one of whom censes the remains.

The 17th. Guthlac appears to King Æthelbald.

The 18th. Before an altar stand thirteen principal benefactors of
Crowland Abbey. Each one, beginning with King Æthelbald, carries a scroll
on which is inscribed their name, and gift.

The Abbey of Crowland was built, and flourished till about the year 870,
when the Danes burnt it down, four years later they destroyed Repton.

Guthlaxton Hundred in the southern part of Leicestershire, and four
churches, dedicated to him, retain his name. The remains of a stone at
Brotherhouse, bearing his name, and a mouldering effigy, in its niche on
the west front of the ruins of Crowland Abbey, are still to be seen. His
“sanctus bell” was at Repton, and as we shall see, in the account of the
Priory, acquired curative powers for headache.


ST. WYSTAN.

Among “the Chronicles and Memorials of Great Britain and Ireland during
the Middle Ages,” published by the authority of Her Majesty’s Treasury,
under the direction of the Master of the Rolls is the “Chronicon Abbatiæ
de Evesham,” written by Thomas de Marleberge or Marlborough, Abbot of
Evesham. In an appendix to the Chronicle he also wrote a life of St.
Wystan from which the following facts, &c., have been gathered.

Wystan was the son of Wimund, son of Wiglaf, King of Mercia, his
mother’s name was Elfleda. Wimund died of dysentery during his father’s
life-time, and was buried in Crowland Abbey, and, later on, his wife
was laid by his side. When the time came for Wystan to succeed to the
crown, he refused it, “wishing to become an heir of a heavenly kingdom.
Following the example of his Lord and master, he refused an earthly
crown, exchanging it for a heavenly one,” and committed the kingdom to
the care of his mother, and to the chief men of the land. But his uncle
Bertulph conspired against him, “inflamed with a desire of ruling, and
with a secret love for the queen-regent.” A council was assembled at
a place, known from that day to this, as Wistanstowe, in Shropshire,
and to it came Bertulph and his son Berfurt. Beneath his cloak Berfurt
had concealed a sword, and (like Judas the traitor), whilst giving a
kiss of peace to Wystan, drew it and smote him with a mortal wound on
his head, and so, on the eve of Pentecost, in the year 849, “that holy
martyr leaving his precious body on the earth, bore his glorious soul
to heaven. The body was conveyed to the Abbey of Repton, and buried in
the mausoleum of his grandfather, with well deserved honour, and the
greatest reverence. For thirty days a column of light, extending from the
spot where he was slain to the heavens above, was seen by all those who
dwelt there, and every year, on the day of his martyrdom, the hairs of
his head, severed by the sword, sprung up like grass.” Over the spot a
church was built to which pilgrims were wont to resort, to see the annual
growth of the hair.

The remains of St. Wystan rested at Repton till the days of Canute
(1016-1035), when he caused them to be transferred to Evesham Abbey, “so
that in a larger and more worthy church the memory of the martyr might be
held more worthily and honourably.” In the year 1207 the tower of Evesham
Abbey fell, smashing the presbytery and all it contained, including the
shrine of St. Wystan. The monks took the opportunity of inspecting the
relics, and to prove their genuineness, which some doubted, subjected
them to a trial by fire, the broken bones were placed in it, and were
taken out unhurt and unstained. The Canons of Repton hearing of the
disaster caused by the falling tower, begged so earnestly for a portion
of the relics, that the Abbot Randulph granted them a portion of the
broken skull, and a piece of an arm bone. The bearers of the sacred
relics to Repton were met by a procession of prior, canons, and others,
over a mile long, and with tears of joy they placed them, “not as before
in the mausoleum of his grandfather, but in a shrine more worthy, more
suitable, and as honourable as it was possible to make it,” in their
Priory church, where they remained till it was dissolved in the year 1538.

In memory of St. Wystan, the first Parish Church of Repton was dedicated
to him, as we shall see in our account of Repton Church.

[Illustration: Plate 3.

Repton Church Crypt. (Page 17.)]




CHAPTER IV.

REPTON CHURCH.


Repton Church is built on the site of the Anglo-Saxon Monastery, which
was destroyed by the Danes in the year 874. It was most probably
built in the reign of Edgar the Peaceable (959-975), as Dr. Charles
Cox writes:—“Probably about that period the religious ardour of the
persecuted Saxons revived ... their thoughts would naturally revert
to the glories of monastic Repton in the days gone by.” On the ruins
of the “Abbey” they raised a church, and dedicated it to St. Wystan.
According to several writers, it was built of stout oak beams and planks,
on a foundation of stone, or its sides might have been made of wattle,
composed of withy twigs, interlaced between the oak beams, daubed within
and without with mud or clay. This church served for a considerable time,
when it was re-built of stone. The floor of the chancel, supported on
beams of wood, was higher than the present one, so the chancel had an
upper and lower “choir,” the lower one was lit by narrow lights, two of
which, blocked up, can be seen in the south wall of the chancel. When the
church was re-built the chancel floor was removed, and the lower “choir”
was converted into the present _crypt_, by the introduction of a vaulted
stone roof, which is supported by four spirally-wreathed piers, five feet
apart, and five feet six inches high, and eight square responds, slightly
fluted, of the same height, and distance apart, all with capitals with
square abaci, which are chamfered off below. Round the four walls is
a double string-course, below which the walls are ashlar, remarkably
smooth, as though produced by rubbing the surface with stone, water and
sand. The vaulted roof springs from the upper string-course, the ribs
are square in section, one foot wide, there are no diagonal groins, it
is ten feet high, and is covered with a thin coating of plaster, which
is continued down to the upper string-course. The piers are monoliths,
and between the wreaths exhibit that peculiar swell which we see on the
shafts of Anglo-Saxon belfry windows, &c.

The double string-course is terminated by the responds. There were
recesses in each of the walls of the crypt. In the wall of the west
recess there is a small arch, opening into a smaller recess, about 18
inches square. Many suggestions have been made about it: (1) it was a
“holy hole” for the reception of relics, (2) or a opening in which a lamp
could be kept lit, (3) or that it was used as a kind of “hagioscope,”
through which the crypt could be seen from the nave of the church, when
the chancel floor was higher, and the nave floor lower than they are now.

There are two passages to the church, about two feet wide and ten feet
high, made from the western angles of the crypt.

A doorway was made, on the north side, with steps leading down to it,
from the outside, during the thirteenth century; there is a holy water
stoup in the wall, on the right hand as you enter the door.

For many years it has been a matter of dispute how far the recesses in
the crypt, on the east, north, and south sides, extended. Excavations
just made (Sept. 1898), have exposed the foundations of the recesses. The
recess on the south side is rectangular, not apsidal as some supposed,
it projects 2 ft. 2 in. from the surface of the wall, outside, and is
6 ft. 2 in. wide. About two feet below the ground level, two blocks of
stone were discovered, (each 2 ft. × 1 ft. 4 in. × 1 ft. 9 in.), two feet
apart, they rest on a stone foundation. The inside corners are chamfered
off. On a level with the stone foundation, to the south of it, are two
slabs under which a skeleton was seen, whose it was, of course, cannot be
said. The present walls across the recesses, on the south and east, block
them half up, and were built in later times.

The recess on the east end was destroyed when a flight of stone steps
was made leading down to the crypt. These steps (there are six of them)
are single, roughly made stones of varied length, resting on the earth,
without mortar. When the flight was complete there would have been
twelve, reaching from the top to the level of the crypt floor.

The steps would afford an easier and quicker approach to the crypt and
church, but when they were made cannot now be said.

The recess on the north side was also destroyed when the outer stairway,
and door, were placed there, probably, as before stated, in the
thirteenth century. On the outside surface of the three walls, above the
ground level, are still to be seen traces of the old triangular-shaped
roofs which covered the three recesses, and served as buttresses to
the walls. Similar “triangular arches” are to be seen at Barnack, and
Brigstock.

The eastern end of the north aisle is the only portion of the ancient
transepts above the ground level. During the restorations in 1886 the
foundations of the Anglo-Saxon nave were laid bare, they extend westward
up to and include the base of the second pier; the return of the west-end
walls was also discovered, extending about four feet inwards.

Over the chancel arch the removal of many coats of whitewash revealed an
opening, with jambs consisting of long and short work; a similar opening
to the north of it used to exist, it is now blocked up.

The _Early English Style_ is only represented by foundations laid bare
during the restoration in 1885, and now indicated in the north and south
aisles, by parallel lines of the wooden blocks, with which the church
is paved. In the south aisle the foundations of a south door were also
discovered (see plan of church). To this period belong the windows in the
north side of the chancel, and in the narrow piece of wall between the
last arch and chancel wall on the north side of the present choir. There
were two corresponding windows on the south side, one of which remains.
All these windows have been blocked up.

The _Decorated Style_ is represented in the nave by four out of the six
lofty pointed arches, supported by hexagonal columns; the two, on either
side, at the east end of the nave, were erected in the year 1854.

The tower and steeple were finished in the year 1340. Basano, in his
Church Notes, records the fact—“Anᵒ 1320 ?40. The tower steeple belonging
to the Prior’s Church of this town was finished and built up, as appears
by a Scrole in Lead, having on it these words—“Turris adaptatur qua
traiectū decoratur. M c ter xx bis. Testu Palini Johis.”

A groined roof of stone, having a central aperture, through which the
bells can be raised and lowered, separates the lower part of the tower
from the belfry.

The north and south aisles were extended to the present width. The
eastern end of the south aisle was also enlarged several feet to the
south and east, and formed a chapel or chantry, as some say, for the
Fyndernes, who were at one time Lords of the Repton Manor. A similar,
but smaller, chapel was at the east end of the north aisle, and belonged
to the Thacker family. They were known as the “Sleepy Quire,” and the
“Thacker’s Quire.” Up to the year 1792 they were separated by walls
(which had probably taken the place of carved screens of wood) in order
to make them more comfortable, and less draughty! These walls were
removed in 1792, when “a restoration” took place.

The square-headed south window of the “Fynderne Chapel” composed of
four lights, with two rows of trefoil and quatrefoil tracery in its
upper part, is worthy of notice as a good specimen of this style, and
was probably inserted about the time of the completion of the tower
and spire. The other windows in the church of one, two, three, and four
lights, are very simple examples of this period, and, like the chancel
arch, have very little pretensions to architectural merit, in design at
least.

The _Perpendicular Style_ is represented by the clerestory windows of two
lights each, the roof of the church, and the south porch.

The high-pitched roof of the earlier church was lowered—the pitch is
still indicated by the string-course on the eastern face of the tower—the
walls over the arcades were raised several feet from the string-course
above the arches, and the present roof placed thereon. It is supported
by eight tie-beams, with ornamented spandrels beneath, and wall pieces
which rest on semi-circular corbels on the north side, and semi-octagonal
corbels on the south side. The space above the tie-beams, and the
principal rafters is filled with open work tracery. Between the beams
the roof is divided into six squares with bosses of foliage at the
intersections of the rafters.

The south porch, with its high pitched roof, and vestry, belongs to this
period. It had a window on either side, and was reached from the south
aisle by a spiral staircase (see plan of church).

The _Debased Style_ began, at Repton, during the year 1719, and ended
about the year 1854. In the year 1719 a singers’ gallery was erected at
the west end of the church, and the arch there was bricked up.

In the year 1779 the crypt was “discovered” in a curious way. Dr. Prior,
Headmaster of Repton School, died on June 16th of that year, a grave was
being made in the chancel, when the grave-digger suddenly disappeared
from sight: he had dug through the vaulted roof, and so fell into the
crypt below! In the south-west division of the groined roof, a rough lot
of rubble, used to mend the hole, indicates the spot.

During the year 1792 “a restoration” of the church took place, the church
was re-pewed, in the “horse-box” style! All the beautifully carved oak
work “on pews and elsewhere” which Stebbing Shaw describes in the
_Topographer_ (May, 1790), and many monuments were cleared out, or
destroyed. Some of the carved oak found its way into private hands, and
was used to panel a dining-room, and a summer-house. Some of the carved
panels have been recovered, and can be seen in the vestry over the south
porch. One of the monuments which used to be on the top of an altar tomb
“at the upper end of the north aisle,” was placed in the crypt, where it
still waits a more suitable resting-place. It is an effigy of a Knight
in plate armour (circa Edward III.), and is supposed to be Sir Robert
Francis, son of John Francis, of Tickenhall, who settled at Foremark. If
so, Sir Robert was the Knight who, with Sir Alured de Solney, came to the
rescue of Bishop Stretton in 1364, and is an ancestor of the Burdetts, of
Foremark.

The crypt seems to have been used as a receptacle for “all and various”
kinds of “rubbish” during the restoration, for, in the year 1802, Dr.
Sleath found it nearly filled up, as high as the capitals, with portions
of ancient monuments, grave-stones, &c., &c. In the corner, formed by
north side of the chancel and east wall of the north aisle, a charnel,
bone, or limehouse had been placed in the Middle Ages: this house was
being cleaned out by Dr. Sleath’s orders, when the workmen came upon the
stone steps leading down to the crypt, following them down they found the
doorway, blocked up by “rubbish,” this they removed, and restored the
crypt as it is at the present day.

During the years 1842 and 1848 galleries in the north and south aisles,
extending from the west as far as the third pillars, were erected.

[Illustration: Plate 4.

Repton Camp. (F. C. H.) (Page 3.)

Repton Church. (Before 1854.) (Page 22.)]

In 1854, the two round arches and pillars, on either side of the
eastern end of the nave, were removed, and were replaced by the present
pointed arches and hexagonal piers, for, as before stated, the sake of
uniformity! Thus an interesting portion belonging to the ancient church
was destroyed. The illustration opposite was copied from a drawing done,
in the year 1847, by G. M. Gorham, then a pupil in the school, now Vicar
of Masham, Bedale. To him our thanks are due for allowing me to copy it.
It shows what the church was like in his time, 1847.

In 1885 the last restoration was made, when the Rev. George Woodyatt
was Vicar. The walls were scraped, layers of whitewash were removed,
the pews, galleries, &c., were removed, the floor of the nave lowered
to its proper level, a choir was formed by raising the floor two steps,
as far west as the second pier, the organ was placed in the chantry at
the east end of the south aisle. The floor of nave and aisles was paved
with wooden blocks, the choir with encaustic tiles. The whole church
was re-pewed with oak pews, and “the choir” with stalls, and two prayer
desks. A new pulpit was given in memory of the Rev. W. Williams, who died
in 1882. The “Perpendicular roof” was restored to its original design:
fortunately there was enough of the old work left to serve as models for
the repair of the bosses, &c. The clerestory windows on the south side
were filled with “Cathedral” glass. The splendid arch at the west end was
opened.

The base of the old font was found among the _débris_, a new font,
designed by Sir Arthur Blomfield, (the architect employed to do the
restoration), was fixed on it, and erected under the tower.

Since that restoration, stained glass windows have been placed in all the
windows of the north aisle by Messrs. James Powell and Sons, Whitefriars
Glass Works, London; the one in the south aisle is also by them. The
outside appearance of the church roof was improved by the addition of an
embattled parapet, the roof itself was recovered with lead.

In 1896 all the bells were taken down, by Messrs. John Taylor, of
Loughborough, and were thoroughly examined and cleansed, two of them, the
5th and 6th (the tenor bell), were re-cast, (see chapter on Bells).

The only part of the church not restored is the chancel, and we hope that
the Lord of the Manor, Sir Vauncey Harpur-Crewe, Bart., will, some day,
give orders for its careful, and necessary restoration.


INCUMBENTS, &c. OF REPTON.

          Jo. Wallin, curate. Temp. Ed. VI.
     1584 Richard Newton, curate.
     1602 Thomas Blandee, B.A., curate.
      ”   John Horobine
     1612 George Ward, minister
          Mathew Rodgers, minister
     1648 Bernard Fleshuier, ”
     1649 George Roades,     ”
     1661 John Robinson,     ”
     1663 John Thacker, M.A., minister.
      ”   William Weely, curate.
     1739 Lowe Hurt, M.A.
     1741 William Astley, M.A.
     1742 John Edwards, B.A.
     1804 John Pattinson.
  1843-56 Joseph Jones, M.A.
  1857-82 W. Williams.
  1883-97 G. Woodyatt, B.A.
     1898 A. A. McMaster, M.A.

[Illustration: Plate 5.

Plan of Repton Church. (F. C. H.)

Plan of Repton Priory. (W. H. H. ST. JOHN HOPE, Mens et Del.) (Page 25.)]




CHAPTER V.

REPTON CHURCH REGISTERS.


There are three ancient register books of births, baptisms, marriages
and burials, and one register book of the Churchwardens’ and Constables’
Accounts of the Parish of Repton. They extend from 1580 to 1670.

The oldest Volume extends from 1580 to 1629: the second from 1629 to
1655: the third from 1655-1670. The Churchwardens’ and Constables’
Accounts from 1582 to 1635.

The oldest Volume is a small folio of parchment (13 in. by 6 in.) of 45
leaves, bound very badly, time-stained and worn, in parts very badly
kept, some of the leaves are loose, and some are quite illegible. It is
divided into two parts, the first part (of thirty pages) begins with
the year 1590 and extends to 1629: the second part begins with “Here
followeth the register book for Ingleby, formemarke and Bretbye,” from
1580 to 1624.

The Second Volume consists of eighteen leaves of parchment (13 in. by
6 in.), unbound, the entries are very faded, only parts of them are
legible, they extend from 1629 to 1655.

The Third Volume has twenty-six leaves (11½ in. by 5½ in.). The entries
are very legible, and extend from 1655 to 1670.

On the first page is written:

                                               December yᵉ 31, 1655.

    Geo: Roades yᵉ day & yeare above written approved & sworne
    Register for yᵉ parrish of Repton in yᵉ County of Derby

                                                  By me JAMES ABNEY.

THE FOLLOWING ENTRIES OCCUR.

    1595 Milton. Wᵐ Alt who was drowned buried yᵉ 26 of ffebruarie.

    1604 William a poor child wh died in the Church Porch buried yᵉ
           4th of June.

    1610 Mʳᵉˢ Jane Thacker daughter of Mʳ Gilbert Thacker Esquyer
           buryed the Xᵗʰ of January Aᵒ Dmi 1610.

           “Vixit Jana deo, vivet pia Jana supernis,
           Esto Panōphæo gratia grata Iovi.”

    1612 Mʳ Gilbert Thacker Esquyer buryed the X of July.

    1613 John Wayte churchⁿ entered the XXVI of Aprill.

    1638 Philip yᵉ sonne of Mʳ Haughton & Lady Sarah his wife was
           bapᵗ at Bratby. March 30.

    1638 The lady Jane Burdit wife of Sⁱʳ Thomas Burdit buryed the
           24ᵗʰ of March.

    1640 Robert the sonne of Mʳ Francis Burdet of Formark Esquiour
           was borne the 11ᵗʰ day of January and baptized the 4ᵗʰ
           day of February 1640.

    1647 William the son of Will Bull bap about Candlemas.

    1648 John Wilkinson of Englebye was bur Nov 4. Recᵈ 6ˢ/8ᵈ for
           the grave.

    1650 Godfrey Thacker sen burᵈ March 26ᵗʰ.

    1652 Old Ashe of Milton bur Oct 12.

    1657 Samuel yᵉ son of Thomas Shaw yᵉ younger bap 28 June.
           (He became the eminent Nonconformist Divine &c.)

    1657 A _tabler_ at Tho Bramly bur Aug:
           (_Tabler_, a pupil of Repton School who lodged or _tabled_
           in the village).

    1658 Yᵉ foole at Anchorchurch bur Aprill 19.

    1658 James a poore man dyed at Bretby Manner was bur May 20.

    1660 A ladd of Nuball’s of Engleby bur yᵉ same day Jan: 2.

    1664 Mʳ Thomas Whitehead was bur Oct 17.
           (1ˢᵗ Ussher of Repton School.)

    1666 Thoˢ Rathban (Rathbone) the Under School-master was bur
           Nov 30.

    1667 Mʳ William Ullock the Head Schoolmaster of Repton School
           died May the 13ᵒ and was buried in the Chancel May the 15ᵒ.

         Collected at Repton (for reliefe of yᵉ inhabitants of Soulbay
           in yᵉ County of Suffolk yᵗ suffered by fire) October yᵉ 30
           1659 the sume of Tenn shillings and eight pence.

                                                      GEO: ROADES, Pastor.

         Several similar collections, “for the fire att Wytham Church,
           Sussex, the sume of 3s. 6d.”

    Sepᵗ 4 1664 “Towards the repairs of the church at Basing in the
      county of Southampton 4s. 3d.”

    Feb. 19 1664 “For the inhabitants of Cromer at Shipden yᵉ sume
      of four shillings five pence.”

      “For two widdows that came with a letter of request viz: Mʳˢ
      Elizabeth Benningfield and Mʳˢ Mary Berry the sum of 3s. 4d.”

      Ditto for Mʳˢ Calligane 3s. 2d.

    Sepʳ 23 1660 “For a fire att Willinghal Staffordshire yᵉ sum of 13/s.”

                                                GEO: ROADES, Minister.
                                                JOHN STONE, Churchwardens.
                                                his ✠ mark.

Across the last page of the register is written this sage piece of advice:

    “Beware toe whome you doe commit the secrites of your mind for
    fules in fury will tell all moveing in there minds.”

                                             RICHARD ROGERSON, 1684.


NAMES OF REPTON FAMILIES IN REGISTERS.

  Pickeringe, Pyckering.
  Meykyn, Meakin, Meakyn, Meakine, Meykyn.
  Orchard.
  Byshopp, Bushopp.
  Cautrill or ell.
  Measam, Measom, Meysom, Mesam, Mesom, Messam, Measome, Meysum,
    Measham, Meysham.
  Gamble, Gambell.
  Ratcliffe, Ratleif.
  Waite, Weat, Wayte, Weyte, Weite, Weayt.
  Marbury, Marburie, Marberrow.
  Keelinge.
  Wayne.
  Gilbert.
  Nubould, Nuball.
  Chedle, Chetle, Chetill.
  Bancrafte, Banchroft.
  Thacker or Thackquer.
  Guddall.
  Myminge, Meming, Mimings.
  Gudwine, Goodwine.
  Bull.
  Eyton, Eaton, Eton.
  Drowborrow.
  Dowglast.
  Bladonne, Blaidon, (carrier.)
  Dakin, Dakyn.
  Wainewrigh, Waynewright.
  Rivett, Ryvett, Rivet.
  Kynton.
  Heawood.
  Budworth.
  Mariyott.
  Pratt.
  Smith als Hatmaker.
  Bykar.
  Ward.
  Nicholas, Birchar.
  Bolesse.
  Shaw.
  Heardwere.
  Stanlye.
  Chaplin, Charpline, Chaplayne.
  Myrchell.
  Bowlayes.
  Fairebright.
  Hygate.
  Denyse, Deonys.
  Heiginbotham, Higgingbottom.
  Shortose, Shorthasse.
  Howlebutt.
  Wixon, Wigson.
  Waudall or ell.
  Morleigh.
  Hastings Crowborough, or Croboro, Crobery, Crobarrow.
  Damnes. (2nd usher of school.)
  Boakes, Boaks.
  Proudman.
  Bakster.
  Chauntry, Chautry.
  Ebbs.
  Wallace.
  Sault.
  Bastwicke.
  Hooton.
  Truelove.
  Gressley, Greasley.
  Pegg.
  Jurdan.
  Ilsly.
  Robards.
  Steeviston of Milton.
  Rathbone, Rathban. (under schoolmaster.)
  Poisar.
  Nuton.
  Dixcson.
  Doxy.

The Register book of the Churchwardens’ and Constable’s Accounts extends
from 1582 to 1635, and includes Repton, and the Chapelries of Formark,
Ingleby, and Bretby.

It is a narrow folio volume of coarse paper, (16 in. by 6 in., by 2
in. thick), and is bound with a parchment which formed part of a Latin
Breviary or Office Book, with music and words. The initial letters are
illuminated, the colours, inside, are still bright and distinct.

At the beginning of each year the accounts are headed “Compotus
gardianorum Pochialis Eccle de Reppindon,” then follow:

(1) The names of the Churchwardens and Constable for the year.

(2) The money (taxes, &c.,) paid by the Chapelries above mentioned.

(3) The names and amounts paid by Tenants of Parish land.

(4) Money paid by the Parish to the Constable.

(5) Money “gathered for a communion,” 1st mentioned in the year 1596. At
first it was gathered only once in July, but afterwards in January, June,
September, October, and November.

The amounts vary from jd to vjd.

(6) The various “items” expended by the Churchwardens and Constable.

Dr. J. Charles Cox examined the contents of the Parish Chest, and
published an account of the Registers &c., and accounts, in Vol. I.
of the Journal of the Derbyshire Archæological Society, 1879. Of the
Accounts he writes, “it is the earliest record of parish accounts, with
the exception of All Saints’, Derby, in the county,” and “the volume is
worthy of a closer analysis than that for which space can now be found.”
Acting on that hint, during the winter months of 1893-4, I made most
copious extracts from the Accounts, and also a “verbatim et literatim”
transcript of the three registers, which I hope will be published some
day.

Dr. Cox’s article is most helpful in explaining many obsolete words,
curious expressions, customs, and references to events long ago
forgotten, a _few_ of the thousands of entries are given below:

The first five leaves are torn, the entries are very faded and illegible.

  1582  It for kepyng the clocke                                  ixs
  1583  It to the glacyier for accᵗ whole year                    vjs viijd
        It to the Constable for his wages                       iiijs
        (Several references to the bells which will be found
          in the chapter on the bells.)
        It to the ryngers the xviiᵗʰ day of November                   xijd
        (Accession to Queen Elizabeth.)
        It to John Colman for kylling two foxes                        xijd
        (A similar entry occurs very frequently.)
  1584  It for a boke of Artycles                                       vjd
        (Issued by order of Archbishop Whitgift, called
          the “Three Articles.”)
        It for washying the surplis                                   viijd
  1585  It Layed for the at the Visitatun at Duffeyld             ijs   vjd
        It for wyne the Saturday before Candlemas day for
          the Communion                                            vs
        (_Candlemas day_, or Purification of the B.
          Virgin Mary, when _candles_ used to be carried
          in procession.)
        It for bread                                                    vjd
        It at the Vysitation at Repton                            ijs viijd
  1586  It at my lord byshopps vysitation at Darby spent
          by the Churwardens and sidemen                           vs
        It of _our ladies even_, given to the ringers for the
          preservation (of) our Queene                                 xijd
        (_Our ladies even_, eve of the Annunciation of the
          B. Virgin Mary. _Preservation_  of _our Queene_,
          from the Babington conspiracy.)
  1587  It to Gylbarte Hynton for pavynge the Church
          floore                                          iijli  iijs    jd
  1590  A note of the armoure of Repton given into the
          hands of Richard Weatte, beyinge Constable
          Anno Di 1590 Inprimis ij corsletts wᵗ all
          that belongeth unto them.
        It ij platt cotts (coats of plate armour.)
        It ij two sweordes, iij dagers, ij gyrgells
          (girdles).
        It ij calivers wᵗh flaxes and tuchboxe.
        (_calivers_, _flaxes_, muskets, flasks for powder,
          _touch boxes_ to hold the priming powder.)
        It ij pycks and ij halberds.
        It for the Treband Souldear a cote and bowe and a
          scheffe of arrows, and a quiver and a bowe.
        (_Treband Souldear_ = our volunteer. Train-band
          soldiers were formed in 1588, to oppose the
          Spanish Armada.)
        It to Mr. Heawoode for the Comen praer boke               ixs
        It geven to Mr. Heawoode for takynge payne in
          gatheryng tythyne                                            xvjd
  1592  It geven to Rycharde Prince for Recevyinge the
          bull and lokinge to hym                                        jd
  1594  It spent at Darby when I payde the money for the
          lame soldiars (returned from France.)                       iiijd
  1595  It spente at Darby when we weare called by sytatyon
          xxiii daye of January                                   vjs viijd
        It geven to Thomas Belsher for bryngying a sertyfycatte
          for us beying excommunycatt                                 viijd
        (Excommunication issued by the Archdeacon owing to
          the neglect of the Church windows.)
        It spent att Darby—where we weare called by Sytation
          for glazing the Church—in the court                           xxd
        It at Darby when we sartyfyed that our Church was
          glazed—to the Regester                                      viijd
  1596  In this year the amᵗ “gathered for a communion,” is
          first mentioned. The amounts varied from jd to vjd.
        Also an account of “a dowble tythyne levied and gathered
          for yᵉ Church by Gilbart Hide, at ijd per head, on all
          beasts &c. in Repton and Milton.”
  1598  It payᵈ to Will Orchard for yᵉ meaned souldyers for
          yᵉ whole yeare                                        iiijs iiijd
        (By an act passed, 35 Eliz. cap. 4. the relief of
          _maimed_ soldiers, and sailors was placed on the
          parochial assessments.)
        It payᵈ to Willᵐ Massye for killinge of towe
          baggers (badgers) and one foxe                         iijs
  1600  It payᵈ to the parritor (_apparitor_, an officer of
          the Archdeacon’s court.)                                       vd
  1601  “The Constables charges this p’sent yeare 1601.”
        Spent at yᵉ muster at Stapenhill yᵉ xxi day of Decʳ             xvd
        It payᵈ to yᵉ gealle (jail) for yᵉ halfe yeare            vjs viijd
        It spent yᵉ v daye of Aprill at yᵉ leat (court)               viijd
        It for mending yᵉ pinfould (in Pinfold Lane)                  iiijd
        It for mendinge yᵉ stockes and for wood for them                xjd
        (The _stocks_ used to stand in front of the village cross.)
        It payᵈ to Mr. Coxe for a p’cept for Watchinge & Wardinge     iiijd
        (“_Watchinge & Wardinge._” A term used to imply the duties
          of Parish Constables. The number of men who were bound
          to keep _watch and ward_, &c., is specified in the
          statute of Winchester (13 ed. I.).)
        It given to yᵉ prest sowldiers                                 xijd
        It was in the year 1601 that the conspiracy of Essex,
          in which the Earl of Rutland was implicated, was
          discovered. Special arrangements were made to meet
          it. A general muster of (_pressed_) soldiers was
          made in Derbyshire.
        It payᵈ for one sworde                                  iiijs
        It     ”     3 girdles                                   iijs
        It     ”     dressing yᵉ pikes                                  vjd
        It     ”     one le(a)thering for yᵉ flaxe                      vjd
        It     ”     dagger sheathe, & a sworde scaber                 xijd
        It payᵈ for one horse to carry yᵉ armor and for
          bringing it home                                            xiijd
        It payᵈ for a payre of Mouldes (for making bullets)           viijd
        It spent ledinge yᵉ armore to Darbey                           xijd
        (According to the Statute of Winchester the armour
          had to be taken by the constables to be viewed.)
        It spent wᵗʰ yᵉ saltpeter men                                   ijd
        (“_Saltpeter men_” engaged during the reign of James
          I. and Charles I. in collecting animal fluids, which
          were converted in saltpetre, and used in the manufacture
          of gunpowder.)
        It spent wᵗʰ a prisoner being w’h him all night and
          going with him to Darbye                              iiijs   ijd
        It payᵈ to Thomas Pearson for mending the crosse          xjs iiijd
       (The Village Cross.)
  1602  It given to gipsies yᵉ XXX of Januarye to avoid yᵉ towne        xxd
        (“This is by far the earliest mention of gypsies in the
          Midland Counties.” They arrived in England about 1500,
          in 1530 they were forbidden to wander about, and were
          ordered to leave the country.)
        It payᵈ in the offishalles Courte takinge our othes           viijd
        (The _oaths_ in taking office as Churchwardens.)
        It payᵈ to yᵉ Clarke of yᵉ Markett for a proclamatione          vjd
        It payᵈ to Thoˢ Chamberlain for killinge of vii hedgehoges      vjd
        It recᵈ by these Churchwardens Henry Pratt sʳ, John
          Cartter, Henry Cautrall, Thoˢ Hill the daye and
          yeare above sayᵈ (xviii Dec 1603) One boxe wᵗʰ
          xviii pieces of evidences.
        (_Evidences_ = deeds referring to plots of land, &c.,
          in, or near the Parish. There are 17 of these deeds
          in the church chest.)
        The Chalice.
        One olde boxe with a cheane thereto fixed, towe pieces
          of leade and four Keayes.
  1603  It spent in makinge a search the night the robbery was
          done in Caulke                                               iijd
  1604  It payᵈ for wine for a Communione yᵉ xiij daye of
          January for 3 gallands                                iiijs
        It for bread                                                    ijd
        Firste spent at yᵉ metinge about Geneva                       iiijd
        It spent goinge to Darbye to paye yᵉ money for Geneva           vjd
        (A collection for the support of refugees there.)
        It payᵈ for one booke of yᵉ constitution of oʳ Kinge            xxd
        (Issued by order of King James after the Hampton
          Court Conference.)
  1605  It payᵈ for one booke of thanksgivinge for our Kinge            vjd
        (After the Gunpowder Plot.)
  1609  It given to the parritor from the bishop (_sic_) of
          Canterbury                                                   xijd
        It payde for poyntinge the steeple                  vli     0     0
  1610  It Receaved of the Churchwardens of Bretbye for
          there part towards byinge the booke of Jewells
          workes                                                 iijs
  1611  It spent the Ambulatione weeke                            ijs
        (Perambulating the parish, or “beating the bounds”
          in Rogation week.)
        For ledinge corne to the tithe barne (which
          amounted to)                                      vli iiijs   xjd
        For gatheringe of tithe for Mʳ Burdane
                            19 days & half                  jli   ixs  iijd
                             5      ”     without his mare        vjs    vd
                                                            ---------------
                                                            jli   xvs viijd
                                                            ---------------
  1614  It given uppon Candellmas daye to one that
          made a sermone                                          ijs
        _The Church Bookes._
          First one Bible.
          2 bookes of Common Prayer.
          One booke of Paraphase of Erasmus uppon the Gospells.
          The Contraversye betwyxte Whittegifte and Carttrighte,
          Jowell and Harrddinge.
          The booke of Jewells workes.
          3 prayer bookes.
          The booke of the queens Injunctions.
          One booke of Sermons.
          One booke of Articles had at the Bishopes visitatione.
          The said bookes be in the Keepinge of Mr. Wattssone
          (Headmaster of Repton School, 1594-1621), except the
          Bible and one booke of Common Prayer.
  1615  A long list of 77 subscribers for “a newe beell.”
          Probably the VIth bell (the tenor). Sum
          gathered                                        xijli viijs viijd
  1616  Receaved by Christopher Ward, Constable, from
          John Cantrell, the Townes Armore.
            2 Corsletts with 2 pickes.
            2 Culivers—(guns).
            One flaske and tuchboxe.
            V head peeces; towe of them ould ones.
            2 howllboardes.
            One payre of Banddebrowes. (Small wooden or tin
              cases, covered with leather, each holding one
              charge for musket or culiver, fastened to a
              broad band of leather, called a _bandoleer_,
              worn over the shoulder).
            2 oulde girdles.
            3 newe girdles: twoe of them with the sowldiers.
            3 payre of hanggers in the sowldiers keepinge.
            3 sowrdes, with two daggers.
            Allsoe the swordes in sowldiers keepinge.
            Allsoe 2 platte Coottes yᵗ Clocksmith not delivered.
        It paid for an Admonitione here and there to enter into
          matrimonie agreeable to the lawe                              vjd
  1617  It given in ernest for a newe byble                            xijd
        Receaved for the ould Byble                                vs
  1618  It paide for a Newe Byble                              xliijs
        (This Bible is still in the Parish chest, in a
          very good state of preservation. “Imprinted
          at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the
          Kings most Excellent Majestie. Anno 1617.”)
        It paid for a the Common Prayer booke                  viijs
  1619  It paid to Rich. Meashame for Killing of vii hedghoges          vjd
  1621  A list of the church books, as above, “delivered unto
          the saide churchwardens Willᵐ Meakine, Tho Gill,
          Edward Farmour.”
  1622  Bookes sent to Mʳ Willᵐ Bladone to be emploied for
          the use of the Parrish, and to be disposed of at
          the discretione of Mʳ Thomas Whiteheade (Headmaster
          of Repton School, 1621-1639). Recᵈ by Mʳ Robert
          Kellett, Godfry Cautrell, Roger Bishope, and
          Robert Orchard, Churchwardens 1622, the XXVᵗʰ
          of December, the said bookes, videlicet:—
            First a faire Bible well bound and hinged.
             2. Bᵖ Babingtone his worckes.
             3. Mʳ Elton on the Collosians.
             4. Mʳ Perkins on the Creede.
             5. Mʳ Dod and Cleaver on yᵉ Commandments.
             6. Bellinging (Bellynny) (Belamy) his Catechesmie.
             7. Mʳ Yonge his Househould Govermente.
             8. The first and second partte of the true watche.
             9. The second partte of the said true watche by
                  Mʳ Brinsley.
            10. The plaine mane’s pathewaye, and sermon of
                  Repenttance written by Mʳ Dentte.
            11. Bradshawe’s p’paracon (preparation) to yᵉ
                  Receavinge of yᵉ Bodie and bloude.
            12. Hieron his Helpe to Devotione.
            13 and 14. Allsoe towe bookes of Martters (Fox’s).
            15. Dowenams workes.
        The conditions to be observed concerning the usinge and
          lendinge of the forsaid bookes.
            First that the said minister nowe p’sent and
              Churchwardens and all theire successors shall
              yearely at the accountt daye for the parrish
              deliver up the bookes to be viewed by Mʳ
              Whiteheade wᵗʰ the parrishioners.
            Allsoe that the said minister and churchwardens
              or any one of them shall have authoritie to
              lend any of the said bookes to any of the
              parrish of Reptonne for the space of one,
              2 or 3 months, as they in there discretione
              shall see fittinge, one this condicione, that
              the parties borrowinge anye of the bookes
              aforenamed eyther fowly bruisinge tearinge
              defaceinge or embezellinge the said bookes
              borrowed, shall make good the said bookes
              thus defaced, towrne, bruised, or embezelled
              unto the parrish.
            Allsoe that the said bookes, kept by the minister
              and Churchwarddens in some convenient place
              shall not be lent more than one at a time
              to anye of the parish.
            Allsoe that anye p’son borrowinge any of the
              said bookes shall subscribe his name on
              borrowinge of the same booke.
            (Allsoe the name) of every booke by anyᵉ borrowed
              shall (be entered) by the said minister and
              churchwarddens.
        (This is a list, and rules of the first “lending
          library” mentioned in Derbyshire. The books have
          been “embezelled” years ago.)
  1623  It given to the Ringers at the time of Prince Charlles
          his comminge forth of Spaine.
        (When he and Buckingham went to Madrid, to arrange
          a marriage with the Infanta of Spain.)
  1625  It paide for towe bookes appoyntted for prayer and fastinge     xxd
  1626  Paid for a linnen bagge to keepe the Chalice with the cover     ijd
        It paid for a booke of Thanksgiving                           xiijd
  1627  It spent in takinge down the Clocke                            xijd
        It paid for makinge the Clocke                    iijli
        It paid for carryinge the Clocke to Ashby and
          fetchinge yᵗ againe                                    iijs
  1628  It given unto a preacher the Sabboth daye beinge
          the 30ᵗʰ of December                                  iiijs
        It paide for a littell prayer book                             iijd
  1629  It given yᵉ 24ᵗʰ of May to a preacher                    iijs   ivd
  1630  It paide for towe excommunicacions                             xvjd
        It paide the IXᵗʰ of November for the Retanene
          of excommunicacions                                     ijs
  1632  It spent the VIᵗʰ daye of May going the Ambulacione       ijs   ivd
        Delivered to Gilbᵗ Weatt, John Pratt, Churchwardens,
          the 30ᵗʰ daye of December 1632.
        Wᵗʰ the Church bookes.
          first the chalice with the cover.
          A pewtyer flaggine.
          A cerples and table clothe.
          A carpitte.
          A cushine for yᵉ pulpitte and a coveringe Clothe.
          One table wᵗʰ a forme and a Buffett stoole.
          vj coweffers (coffers) and vij keys twoe cowffers
            filled with leade.
          vj formes and moulde fraeme for castinge of leade:
          A moulde frame.
          5 Tressells of wood.
          xviij deeds in a boxe xij of yem sealed and vj w’hout
            seales.
          Church books (as before, with the addittion of),
          One book of Homilies.
          A praire booke of thankesgivinge after yᵉ conspiracie.
          A boke of Cannons (Canons).
          Register boke.
          Dod and Cleaver.
          Codgers househould Government.
          Third part of newe watch.
  1633  It given unto a Irishman and womane they having a pass
          to Northumberland                                            iijd
        It paide for X yards of Holland to make a newe serples
          and for makinge of yᵗ                                 xxvjs   vjd
        It given to a companie of Irishe foulkes they havinge
          a pass allowed by Sʳ Rich Harpur                            iiijd
  1634  It given to one having greatt losses and taken
          prisoner by Turrkes                                         xiijd
        It paid to John Cooke for the Communion table
          and the frame and the wealing of it about       iijli
  1635  It given to a woman that had two chilren                        ijd




CHAPTER VI.

REPTON’S MERRY BELLS.


    “Barrow’s big boulders, Repton’s merry bells,
    Foremark’s cracked pancheons, and Newton’s egg shells.”

Thus does a local poet compare Repton bells with those of neighbouring
parishes. It is not intended to defend the comparison, for as Dogberry
says, “Comparisons are odorous”! but to write an account of the bells,
derived from all sources, ancient and modern.

Llewellynn Jewitt, in Vol. XIII. of the _Reliquary_, describing the
bells of Repton, writes, “at the church in the time of Edward VI. there
were iij great bells & ij small.” Unfortunately “the Churchwardens’ and
Constables’ accounts of the Parish of Repton” only extend from the year
1582 to 1635. I have copied out most of the references to our bells
entered in them, which will, I hope, be interesting to my readers.


Extracts from “the Churchwardens’ and Constables’ accounts of the Parish
of Repton.”

  A.D. 1583. The levy for the bell                           vjˡⁱ ixˢ 0
             It’ spent at takying downe the bell                   xvjᵈ
             It’ payd to the Bellfounder                   xxxiijˢ iijᵈ
             It’ bestowed on the s’vants at casting of ye bell     xvjᵈ
             It’ expensys drawing up the bell                      vijᵈ
             It’ to the ryngers the xviiᵗʰ day of november         xijᵈ
  A.D. 1584. Recevyd of the levy for the bell              vjˡⁱ xˢ vijᵈ
             It’ of Bretby towards the bell                   vjˢ viijᵈ
             It’ spent at taking downe ye bell                    viijᵈ
             It’ bestowed on the bell founder                       ijᵈ
             It’ Payd to Bellfounder for weight, _i.e._,
               iiij score & ij pounds                   iijˡⁱ xiˢ viijᵈ
  A.D. 1585. It’ for a bell rope for the great bell                 ijˢ
             It’ to John Pratt for makinge iiij newe bellropes       vˢ
             It’ the day before Saynt Hew’s day for mendyng the
               bels, & for nayles                                 viijᵈ
  A.D. 1586. It’ of our ladie’s even, given to the ringers for
               the preservation of our Queene                      xijᵈ
             _Our ladie’s even_, eve of the Annunciation of
               the Blessed Virgin Mary (March 25th).
             _Preservation of our Queene_ Elizabeth from the
               Babington Conspiracy.
  A.D. 1587. It’ given unto the ringers uppon coronation daye      iijᵈ
  A.D. 1589. It’ for a bell rope                              ijˢ viijᵈ
  A.D. 1590. It’ payde to francis Eaton for mendynge the
               irons aboutt the bells                          ijˢ iijᵈ
  A.D. 1592. It’ payde to Ralphe Weanwryghte for trussynge
               the bells agyne the Coronacyon daye                 iijˢ
  A.D. 1600. It’ spent in takinge downe ye beell                   xijᵈ
             It’ payd to John Welsh fordowne takinge hitt donne     vjᵈ
             It’ spent in lodinge hitt                            iiijᵈ
             It’ spent in charges going with the beell to
               Nottingham, being towe days and one night      vjˢ viijᵈ
             It’ payd to ye bellfounder for castinge ye
               beell                                      iiijˡⁱ xviijˢ
             It’ spent with him                                     ijᵈ
             It’ payd for yookeinge ye Beell and for greysse  ijˢ viijᵈ
             It’ spent uppon them that holpe with the beell          xᵈ
  A.D. 1603. It’ given to the ringers uppon New yeares daye
               morninge                                             vjᵈ
             It’ given to ye ringers upon St. James daye (July
               25th)                                               xijᵈ
             It’ given to ye ringers the v daye of August          xijᵈ
  A.D. 1605. It’ payd at hanginge up ye greatte bell                vjᵈ
             It’ bestowed of ye Ringers at ye first Ringinge of
               ye bells                                            vijᵈ
             It’ payd for greese for ye bells                     viijᵈ
  A.D. 1607. It’ given to ye Ringers uppon Christmas daye morning iiijᵈ
  A.D. 1614. It’ towe bellclappers
  A.D. 1615. The names of them that gave money to bye the
               newe beell 80 (Repton, 62. Milton, 18.)
             Sum gathered                             xijˡⁱ viijˢ viijᵈ
  A.D. 1623. First paide for castinge the bell                      vˡⁱ
             It’ given to the Ringers at the time of Prince
               Charlles his comminge forth of spaine.
               (Oct. 1623).                                        xijᵈ

Extract from the diary of Mr. George Gilbert.

    “A.D. 1772, Oct. 7th. The third bell was cracked, upon ringing
    at Mr. John Thorpe’s wedding. The bell upon being taken down,
    weighed 7 cwt. 2 qr. 18lb., clapper, 24lb. It was sold at 10d.
    per lb., £35. 18s. Re-hung the third bell, Nov. 21st, 1774.
    Weight 8 cwt. 3 qr. 24lb., at 13d. per lb., £54. 7s. 8d.,
    clapper, 1 r. 22 lb., at 22d., £1. 2s. 10d. £55. 9s 6½d.”

This is all the information I can gather about “Repton’s merry bells”
from ancient sources.

For some time our ring of six bells had only been “_chimed_,” owing to
the state of the beams which supported them, it was considered dangerous
to “_ring_” them.

During the month of January, 1896, Messrs. John Taylor and Co., of
Loughborough, (descendants of a long line of bell-founders), lowered the
bells down, and conveyed them to Loughborough, where they were thoroughly
cleansed and examined. Four of them were sound, but two, the 5th and
6th, were found to be cracked, the 6th (the Tenor bell) worse than the
5th. The crack started in both bells from the “crown staple,” from which
the “clapper” hangs; it (the staple) is made of iron and cast into the
crown of the bell. This has been the cause of many cracked bells. The two
metals, bell-metal and iron, not yielding equally, one has to give way,
and this is generally the bell metal. The “Canons,” as the projecting
pieces of metal forming the handle, and cast with the bell, are called,
and by which they are fastened to the “headstocks,” or axle tree, were
found to be much worn with age. All the “Canons” have been removed, holes
have been drilled through the crown, the staples removed, and new ones
have been made which pass through the centre hole, and upwards through
a square hole in the headstocks, made of iron, to replace the old wooden
ones. New bell-frames of iron, made in the shape of the letter H, fixed
into oak beams above and below, support the bells, which are now raised
about three feet above the bell chamber floor, and thus they can be
examined more easily.

During the restoration of the Church in 1886, the opening of the west
arch necessitated the removal of the ringers’ chamber floor, which had
been made, at some period or other, between the ground floor and the
groined roof, so the ringers had to mount above the groined ceiling when
they had to ring or chime the bells. There, owing to want of distance
between them and the bells, the labour and inconvenience of ringing was
doubled, the want of sufficient leverage was much felt: now the ringers
stand on the ground floor, and with new ropes and new “sally-guides”
their labour is lessened, and the ringing improved.

When the bells were brought back from Loughboro’ I made careful
“rubbings” of the inscriptions, legends, bell-marks, &c., before they
were raised and fixed in the belfry. The information thus obtained,
together with that in Vol. XIII. of the _Reliquary_, has enabled me to
publish the following details about the bells.

The “rubbings” and “squeezes” for the article in the _Reliquary_ were
obtained by W. M. Conway (now Sir Martin Conway) when he was a boy at
Repton School.

[Illustration: Plate 6.

REPTON BELL MARKS AND ORNAMENTS.]

_The 1st (treble) Bell._

On the haunch, between three lines, one above, two below,

    FRAVNCIS THACKER OF LINCOLNS INN ESQᴿ, 1721.

a border: fleurs-de-lis (fig. 7): Bell-mark of Abraham Rudhall, (a famous
bell-founder of Gloucester): border (fig. 7).

A catalogue of Rings of Bells cast by A. R. and others, from 1684-1830,
is in the Bodleian Library, Oxford: this bell is mentioned as the gift of
Francis Thacker.

At the east end of the north aisle of our Church there is a mural
monument to his memory.

_The 2nd Bell._

On the crown a border of fleurs-de-lis (fig. 9). Round the haunch,

    Is sweetly toling men do call to taste on meats that feed the
    soule

between two lines above and below, then below the same border (fig. 9)
inverted.

    1622 Godfrey Thacker Iane Thacker

This bell is referred to in the Churchwardens’ accounts under dates 1615
and 1623.

_The 3rd Bell._

Round the haunch, between two lines,

    THOˢ. GILBERT & IOHN TETLEY CHVRCH WARDENS 1774 PACK & CHAPMAN
    OF LONDON FECIT

Below, a border, semicircles intertwined.

This is the bell referred to in the extract quoted above from George
Gilbert’s diary.

_The 4th Bell._

Round the haunch, between six lines (3 above and 3 below),

    ✠ Melodie Nomen Tenet Magdelene

a shield: three bells (two and one), with a crown between them (fig. 1),
(Bell mark of Richard Brasyer, a celebrated Norwich Bell founder, who
died in 1513) a lion’s head on a square (fig. 2): a crown on a square
(fig. 3); and a cross (fig. 5).

_The 5th Bell._

Round the haunch, between two lines, one above, one below,

    ✠ Vox du̅i̅ ihū x̅r̅i̅ vox exultarionis

same marks (except the crown) as No. 4 Bell: a king’s head crowned
(fig. 4): and a cross (fig. 6). Below this, round the haunch, a
beautiful border composed of a bunch of grapes and a vine leaf (fig. 8),
alternately arranged.

Below, the Bell mark of John Taylor and Co. within a double circle, a
triangle interlaced with a trefoil, and a bell in the centre. Above the
circle the sacred emblem of S. John Baptist, the lamb, cross, and flag.
The name of the firm within the circle.

RECAST 1896.

_The 6th Bell (the tenor Bell)._

Round the haunch, between four lines, two above, and two below,

    Hec Campana Sacra Fiat Trinitate Beata GILB THACKAR ESQ IC MW
    CH WARDENS 1677

(_no bell marks_).

Below, a border like that on the fifth Bell.

    RECAST 1896.

    G. WOODYATT, VICAR.
    J. ASTLE,    } CHURCHWARDENS.
    T. E. AUDEN, }

Bell mark of J. Taylor and Co. on the opposite side.

(Owing to the difference of the type of the inscription, and names, it is
supposed that this bell was recast in 1677, so it may have been one of
the “three great bells” in Edward VI.’s time.)

The following particulars of the bells have been supplied by Messrs. John
Taylor & Co.

              Diameter.  Height.    Note.    Weight.
               ft.  in.  ft.  in.          cwt. qr. lbs.
    No.    I.   2   9½    2   3      C♯      7   3   19
     ”    II.   2  10¾    2   4½     B       7   2   27
     ”   III.   3   0½    2   4½     A       8   1   18
     ”    IV.   3   2     2   6½     G♯      9   2   21
     ”     V.   3   6     2  10      F♯     12   2   26
     ”    VI.   3  11     3   1      E      17   3    0
                               -----------------------------
                     Total     3 tons 4 cwts. 0 qrs. 27 lbs.
                               -----------------------------
    Key-note E major.

To complete the octave, two more bells are required, D♯ and E, then
indeed Repton will have a “ring” second to none.




CHAPTER VII.

THE PRIORY.


THE PRIORY FOUNDED, &c.

Before we write an account of the next most important event in the
history of Repton, viz., the founding of Repton Priory, we must go back
to the year 1059, when Calke Abbey is supposed to have been founded by
Algar, Earl of Mercia. Dr. Cox is of opinion that it was founded later,
at the end of the reign of William (Rufus), or at the beginning of that
of Henry I. circa 1100. About that date a Priory of Canons regular of
St. Augustine, dedicated to St. Giles, was founded. Many benefactors
made grants of churches, lands, &c., a list of all these will be found
in Cox’s Derbyshire Churches, vol. iii., p. 346. There is a curious
old Chronicle, written in Latin, by one T(h)omas de Musca, Canon of
Dale Abbey. Each section of the Chronicle begins with a letter which,
together, form the Author’s name, a monkish custom not uncommon. The
section beginning with an E. (Eo tempore) records the arrival, at
Deepdale, of the Black Canons, as they were called, from Kalc (Calke).
Serlo de Grendon, Lord of Badeley or Bradeley, near Ashbourne, “called
together the Canons of Kalc, and gave them the place of Deepdale.” Here,
about 1160, the Canons “built for themselves a church, a costly labour,
and other offices,” which became known as Dale Abbey, in which they lived
for a time, “apart from the social intercourse of men,” but “they began
too remissly to hold themselves in the service of God; they began to
frequent the forest more than the church; more to hunting than to prayer
or meditation, so the King ordered them to return to the place whence
they came,” viz., Calke. During the reign of Henry II., Matilda, widow of
Randulf, 4th Earl of Chester, who died 1153, granted to God, St. Mary,
the Holy Trinity, and to the Canons of Calke, the working of a quarry
at Repton, (Repton Rocks), together with the advowson of the church of
St. Wystan at Repton, &c., &c., on condition that as soon as a suitable
opportunity should occur, the Canons of Calke should remove to Repton,
which was to be their chief house, and Calke Abbey was to become subject
to it. “A suitable opportunity occurred” during the episcopate of Walter
Durdent, Bishop of Coventry only, at first, afterwards of Lichfield. He
died at Rome, Dec. 7th, 1159. The usual date given for _the founding_
of Repton Priory is A.D. 1172, but this must be wrong for the simple
reason that Matilda addresses the Charter of Foundation to Bishop Walter
Durdent, who died, as we saw, in 1159: moreover, the “remains” of the
Priory belong to an earlier date; probably the date 1172 refers to the
_coming_ of the Canons from Calke to Repton, as Dugdale writes, “About
the year 1172, Maud, widow of Randulf, _removed_ the greater part of
them here (Repton), having prepared a church and conventual buildings
for their reception.” To those interested in Charters, copies of the
original, and many others, can be read in Bigsby’s “History of Repton,”
Dugdale’s “Monasticon,” and Stebbing-Shaw’s Article in Vol. II. of “the
Topographer,” in which he has copied several “original Charters, not
printed in the Monasticon,” which were in the possession of Sir Robert
Burdett, Bart., of Foremark, and others.

[Illustration: Plate 7.

Repton Priory.]

The Charters, containing grants, extend from Stephen’s reign,
(1135-1154), to the reign of Henry V., (1413-1422), and include the
church of St. Wystan, Repton, with its chapels of Newton Solney, Bretby,
Milton, Foremark, Ingleby, Tickenhall, Smisby, and Measham, the church
at Badow, in Essex, estates at Willington, including its church, and
Croxall.

In 1278 a dispute arose between the Prior of Repton and the inhabitants
of the Chapelry of Measham, which had been granted to the Priory about
1271. The chancel of Measham Church was “out of repair,” and the question
was, who should repair it? After considerable debate, it was settled
that the inhabitants would re-build the chancel provided that the
Priory should find a priest to officiate in the church, and should keep
the chancel in repair for ever after, both of which they did till the
dissolution of the Priory.

In the year 1364 Robert de Stretton, Bishop of Lichfield (1360-1386),
was holding a visitation at Repton in the Chapter House of the Priory.
For some reason or other, not known, the villagers, armed with bows and
arrows, swords and cudgels, with much tumult, made an assault on the
Priory gate-house. The Bishop sent for Sir Alured de Solney, and Sir
Robert Francis, Lords of the Manors of Newton Solney and Foremark, who
came, and quickly quelled this early “town and gown” row, without any
actual breach of the peace. The monument in the crypt of Repton Church,
where it was placed during the “restoration” of 1792, is supposed
to be an effigy of Sir Robert Frances. “The Bishop proceeded on his
journey, and, on reaching Alfreton, issued a sentence of interdict on
the town and Parish Church of Repton, with a command to the clergy, in
the neighbouring churches, to publish the same under pain of greater
excommunication.” See _Lichfield Diocesan Registers_.

On October 26th, 1503, during the reign of Henry VII., an inquisition was
held at Newark. A complaint was heard against the Prior of Repton for
not providing a priest “to sing” the service in a chapel on Swarkeston
Bridge, “nor had one been provided for the space of twenty years,
although a piece of land between the bridge and Ingleby, of the annual
value of six marks, had been given to the Prior for that purpose.”


THE PRIORY DISSOLVED AND DESTROYED.

The Priory of Repton was dissolved in the year 1538. By the advice of
Thomas Cromwell—_malleus monachorum_—the hammer of the monks—Henry
VIII. issued a commission of inquiry into the condition, &c., of the
monasteries in England. A visitation was made in 1535, the results
were laid before the House of Commons, in a report commonly known as
the “Black Book.” In 1536 an Act was passed for the suppression of all
monasteries possessing an income of less than £200. a year. By this Act
376 monasteries were dissolved, and their revenues, £32,000. per annum,
were granted to the King, by Divine permission Head of the Church! Repton
Priory was among them. In the _Valor Ecclesiasticus_ (27 Henry VIII.)
the gross annual value of the temporalities and spiritualities is given
as £167. 18s. 2½d. In 1535, Dr. Thomas Leigh and Dr. Richard Layton,
_visited_ Repton and gave the amount as £180. Also they reported, as they
were expected, that the Canons were not living up to their vows, &c.,
&c., and “Thomas Thacker was put in possession of the scite of the seid
priory and all the demaynes to yᵗ apperteynying to oʳ sov’aigne lorde the
Kynges use the xxvj day of October in the xxx yere of oʳ seid sov’aigne
lorde Kyng henry the viijᵗʰ.” There is a very full inventory of the goods
and possessions in the Public Record Office, _Augmentation Office Book,
172_. A transcript of this inventory is given by Bigsby in his _History
of Repton_, also by W. H. St. John Hope, in _Vol. VI._ of the _Derbyshire
Archæological Journal_. From this inventory, and Mr. St. John Hope’s
articles in the journal, a very good account and description can be given
of the Priory as it was at the time of its dissolution.

The dissolved Priory was granted to Thomas Thacker in 1539, he died in
1548, leaving his property to his son Gilbert. He, according to Fuller
(_Church History, bk. vi., p. 358_), “being alarmed with the news that
Queen Mary had set up abbeys again (and fearing how large a reach such
a precedent might have), upon a Sunday (belike the better day, the
better deed) called together the carpenters and masons of that county,
and plucked down in one day (churchwork is a cripple in going up, but
rides post in coming down) a most beautiful church belonging thereto,
saying “he would destroy the nest, for fear the birds should build
therein again”.” The destruction took place in the year 1553. How well he
accomplished the work is proved by the ruins uncovered during the years
1883-4.

This Gilbert died in 1563, as set forth on the mural tablet in the south
aisle of Repton Church, a copy of which I have made, so that my readers
may see what sort of a person he was who “wrought such a deed of shame.”
Gilbert sold the remains of the Priory to the executors of Sir John Port
in 1557, he and his descendants lived at the Hall till the year 1728,
when Mary Thacker, heiress of the Manor of Repton Priory, left it, and
other estates, to Sir Robert Burdett, of Foremark, Bart. Since that time
the Hall has been occupied by the Headmasters of Repton School.


REPTON PRIORY DESCRIBED.

The Priory followed the usual plan of monastic buildings, differing
chiefly in having the cloister on the _north_ of its church, instead of
the _south._ This alteration was necessary owing to the river Trent being
on the north. In choosing a site for monasteries the water supply was of
the first consideration, as everything, domestic and sanitary, depended
on that. The Conventual buildings consisted of Gate-house, Cloister,
with Church on its south side, Refectory or Fratry on its north. The
Chapter Rouse, Calefactorium, with Dormitory above them, on its east
side. Kitchens, buttery, cellars, with Guest Hall over them, on its west
side. The Infirmary, now Repton Hall, “beside the still waters” of the
Trent, on the north of the Priory. The Priory precincts, (now the Cricket
ground), were surrounded by the existing wall on the west, south, and
east sides; on the north flowed, what is now called, “the Old Trent,” and
formed a boundary in that direction.

[Illustration: Plate 8.

Sir John Porte Knt. The Founder of Repton School. (F. C. H.) (Page 62.)

Gilbert Thacker. (Page 54.)]

On the east side of the Priory was the Mill. The wall, with arch-way,
through which the water made its way across the grounds in a
north-westerly direction, is still _in situ_ in the south-east corner of
the Cricket ground. The Priory, and well-stocked fish ponds, were thus
supplied with water for domestic, sanitary, and other purposes.

The bed of the stream was diverted to its present course, outside the
eastern boundary wall, by Sir John Harpur, in the year 1606.

The _Gate-house_ (now represented by the School Arch, which was its outer
arch, and wall) consisted of a square building with an upper chamber,
and other rooms on the ground floor for the use of the porter. Two
“greate gates,” with a wicket door let into one of them, for use when the
gates were closed, or only pedestrians sought for admission, provided
an entrance to the Priory. Proceeding through the arch-way of the
Gate-house, we find ourselves in the precincts. In the distance, on our
left hand, was the Parish Church of St. Wystan, on our right the Priory
Church and conventual buildings.

The _Priory Church_ consisted of nave, with north and south aisles,
central tower, north and south transepts, choir, with aisles, and a south
chapel, and a presbytery to the east of the choir. The _Nave_ (95 ft. 6
in. long, and, with aisles, 51 ft. 8 in. wide) “was separated from the
aisles by an arcade of six arches, supported by clustered pillars of good
design, and must have been one of the most beautiful in this part of the
country, all of exceptionally good character and design, and pertained
to the transitional period of architecture which prevailed during the
reign of Edward I., (1272-1307), when the severe simplicity of the Early
English was merging into the more flowing lines of the Decorated.” In the
north aisle the foundations of an older church, perhaps the original one,
were discovered in 1883-4.

There were several Chapels in the Nave, two of which are named, viz., “Oʳ
lady of petys Chapell” and the “Chapell of Saint Thomas,” with images,
“reredoses, of wood gylte, and alebaster,” “and a partition of tymber
seled ouerin seint Thom’s Chapell.” “vij. peces of tymber and lytell
oulde house of tymber,” probably the remains of a shrine, and “xij.
Apostells,” _i.e._ images of them. “j sacrying bell,” sanctus bell, used
during the celebration of the mass. In the floor, in front of the central
tower arch, a slab was discovered, (6 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 2 in.), bearing
a rudely cut cross, with two steps, and an inscription, in Old English
letters, partly obliterated, round the margin “(Orate pro) anima magistri
edmundi duttoni quondam canonici huius ecclisie qui obiit ... januarii
anno diu mcccclᵒ cui’ ppic (deus Amen).” This slab is now lying among the
ruins at the east end of the Pears School.

_Central Tower_ (25 ft. by 21 ft. 6 in.) supported by four large piers.
Between the two eastern piers there was a pulpitum, a solid stone screen
(5 ft. 4½ in. deep), with a door in the centre (4 ft. 4½ in. wide). In
the northern half was a straight stone stair leading to the organ loft
above, where was “j ould pair of Organs,” a phrase often met with in old
inventories, and church accounts, in describing that instrument of music.
Through the passage under the screen we enter the _Choir_. The step
leading _down_ to the choir floor, much worn by the feet of the canons
and pilgrims, is still _in situ_. The Choir (26 ft. wide, 31 ft. long)
was separated from the south Choir aisle, by an arcade of five arches,
from the north choir aisle, by an arcade of three arches. All traces of
the Canons’ stalls have gone, but there was room for about thirty-four,
thirteen on each side, and four returned at the west end of the Choir. In
the Choir was the High Altar with “v. great Images” at the back of which
was a retable, or ledge of alabaster, with little images, (on a reredos
with elaborate canopies above them). “iiij lytle candlestyks” and “a
laumpe of latten,” _i.e._, a metal chiefly composed of copper, much used
in church vessels, also “j rode” or cross.

On the south of the choir was _a chapel dedicated to St. John_, with his
image, and alabaster table, similar to that in the choir. To the south of
St. John’s Chapel was the “_Chapel our Lady_” similarly ornamented, these
two chapels were separated from the south transept by “partitions of
tymber,” or screens, the holes in which the screens were fixed are still
to be seen in the bases of the pillars. On the east of the choir was
the Presbytery. In the _South Transept_ was the Chapel of St. Nicholas
with images of St. John and St. Syth, (St. Osyth, daughter of Frithwald,
over-lord of the kingdom of Surrey, and Wilterberga daughter of King
Penda). Of the _North Choir Aisle_ nothing remains: it is supposed that
in it was the shrine of St. Guthlac, whose sanctus bell is thus referred
to by the visitors in their report “superstitio—Huc fit peregrinatio ad
Sanctum Guthlacum et ad eius campanam quam solent capitibus imponere ad
restinguendum dolorem capitis.” “Superstition. Hither a pilgrimage is
made to (the shrine of) St. Guthlac and his (sanctus) bell, which they
were accustomed to place to their heads for the cure of headache.” The
_North Transept_ was separated from the north choir aisle by an arcade of
three arches, immediately to the east of which the foundations of a wall,
about six feet wide, were discovered, which, like those in the north nave
aisle, belonged to an older building. Many beautiful, painted canopies,
tabernacle work, &c., were found among the _débris_ of the north transept
and aisle, which no doubt adorned the shrines, and other similar
erections, which, _before_ the suppression of the monasteries, had been
destroyed, and their relics taken away—that is, probably, the reason why
we find no mention of the shrines of St. Guthlac, or St. Wystan in the
Inventory.

In the western wall of the North Transept there was a curious recess
(13 ft. 10 in. by 4 ft. 10 in.) which may have been the _armarium_, or
cupboard of _the Vestry_, to hold the various ornaments, and vestments
used by the Canons, “j Crosse of Coper, too tynacles, (tunicles), ij
albes, ij copes of velvet, j cope of Reysed Velvet, iiij towels & iiij
alter clothes, ij payented Alterclothes,” &c., &c.

Leaving the Church, we enter _the Cloister_, through the door at the east
end of the Nave, it opened into the south side of the Cloister (97 ft. 9
in. long by 95 ft. wide). Here were “seats,” and “a lavatory of lead,”
but, owing to alterations, very little indeed is left except the outside
walls. Passing along the eastern side we come to the _Chapter House_,
the base of its entrance, divided by a stone mullion into two parts, was
discovered, adjoining it on the north side was a _slype_, or passage,
through which the bodies of the Canons were carried for interment in
the cemetery outside. The _slype_ (11¾ ft. wide by 25½ ft. long) still
retains its roof, “a plain barrel vault without ribs, springing from a
chamfered string course.” Next to the slype was the _Calefactorium_ or
warming room. Over the Chapter House, Slype, and Calefactorium was the
_Dormitory_ or _Dorter_, which was composed of cells or cubicles.

The _Fratry_ or _Refectory_ occupied the north side of the Cloister,
here the Canons met for meals, which were eaten in silence, excepting
the voice of the reader. A pulpit was generally built on one of the side
walls, from which legends, &c., were read. Underneath the Fratry was a
passage, leading to the Infirmary, and rooms, used for various purposes,
Scriptorium, &c. At the east end of the Fratry was the _Necessarium_,
well built, well ventilated, and well flushed by the water from the Mill
race.

At the west end of the Fratry was the _Buttery_. The west side of the
Cloister was occupied by the _Prior’s Chamber_, and five others called,
in the Inventory, “_the Inner_,” “_Gardyn_,” “_Next_,” “_Halle_,” and
“_Hygh Chambers_.” All were furnished with “fether bedds, &c., &c.,”
for the use of guests, who were received and entertained in this part
of the Priory. Underneath these rooms were “the Kychenn,” “Larder,”
“Bruhouse,” &c., called the _Cellarium_, over which the Cellarer had
supreme authority. Originally the _Cellarium_ was divided into three
parts, Kitchen, Cellar, and Slype or passage into the south side of the
Cloister. The part assigned to the Kitchen was sub-divided into three
rooms, one on the east side, two on the west. One of these two (the
south) has a vaulted roof, with plain square ribs, the boss where they
meet has been carved, and a part of one of the ribs has been ornamented
with the dog tooth moulding, for about 18 inches, there it stopped
unfinished, in the walls are many recesses for the reception of “plate,”
&c.

The _Cellar_ was a long room (89 ft. by 26 ft.), divided into two
“alleys” by a row of six massive Norman columns, four of which remain,
one has a scollopped capital, the others are plain. The floor above was
divided in a similar manner, with the Prior’s Chamber at the north end,
the _Guest Hall_, divided into the various rooms mentioned above, and
a chamber over the slype, which was probably used as a parlour by the
guests.

Besides these there are three houses mentioned, viz., “_The Kelyng or
Yelyng house_,” (Yele-House, _i.e._, brewing-house). It’ there xvj
Kelyngleades and ij mashfattes.”

“_The Boultyng house_” (where the meal was bolted or sifted in the
boultyng hutch). It’ there ij troffes, j boultyng huche & j one syve
(sieve).”

“_The Kyll-house._” It’ j heyr upon the Kyll & j sestiron of lead.”
(Kyll-house = Slaughter house?)

The contents of all these, including “Grayne” (wheat, barley, malt,
peas, and hay); “Catell” (three “Kye” cows), ten “horssys,” and “two old
carts”; and one Reke (rick) of Peas, sold to Thomas Thacker for the sum
of £40. 2s. 0d., made up of the following items.

                                  £. s. d.

    The contents of the Church     2 10 0
               ”        Vestry     4  0 0
               ”        Priory    14 19 4
    For Grayne and Catell         18 12 8
                                 --------
                                 £40  2 0

This, with the sum of £122. 17s 6d. “Imbesulyd” by John Smyth and Richard
haye, made a total of £162. 19s. 6d.

Out of this Rewardes of £2. each were given to the Sub-Prior and eight
canons, and sums, varying from 25s. to 20d., were given to twenty-five
servants, and other exs., Total £38. 16s. 6d., so there remained in the
hands of the Commissioners £124. 3s. 0d.

Pensions were also granted to the Sub-Prior and the Canons, varying from
£6. to 6s. 8d.

Certain “Whyte Plate” consisting of two Chalices and 10 spoons, Four
bells, weighing 24 cwt., and 29 “fothers” of lead remained unsold. A
fother was 19½ cwt.

The following is a list of the Priors of Repton, with dates as far as
they are known.

  Alured, before 1200.
  Reginald, about 1230.
  Ralph, died 1317.
  John de Lych or Lynchfield, 1336.
  Simon de Sutton, election confirmed 1st August. (20th Edward
    III.), 1347.
  Ralph de Derby, 1356-7.
  William de Tuttebury, 1398.
  William Maneysin, 1411.
  Wistan Porter, 1420.
  John Overton, 1437.
  John Wylæ or Wylne, 1439.
  Thomas de Sutton, 1471.
  Henry Preste, 1486.
  William de Derby, 1511.
  John Yonge, 1523
  Thomas Rede, sub-prior 1535.
  Rauffe Clarke, sub-prior 1538.

[Illustration: Plate 9.

Outer Arch of Gate House. (Page 55.)]




CHAPTER VIII.

REPTON SCHOOL.


“The Foundation of Repton School dates from the middle of that century
which is truly described as the age of the revival of learning. It may
be that other times have witnessed great changes and progress,—that our
own day bears signs of even more wonderful intellectual activity than any
that has gone before. But our successes are only the natural results of
the achievements of our Fathers,—the gathering in of the Autumn fruits
sown in that Spring. The mental revolution of the sixteenth century broke
suddenly on the dull cold sleep of past ages, with the mysterious impulse
and pregnant energy with which a Scandinavian Spring bursts forth from
the bosom of Winter.

“The wisest of our countrymen in those days, men who could at once see
before them, and gather wisdom from the past, seem to have discerned
the movement when as yet the mass was hardly stirred, and it was their
care to provide means to foster and direct it. Kings and Cardinals and
Prelates led the way; Knights and Gentlemen and Yeomen followed. By the
munificence of Wolsey and King Henry, the noblest Colleges of Oxford
and Cambridge were established:—Edward VI. placed Grammar Schools in
all his principal towns; as Shrewsbury, and Birmingham, and Bath:—and
with the same object John Lyon, (yeoman of Harrow), Lawrence Sheriffe,
(grocer of London), Sir John Porte, (Knight of the Bath), founded their
schools,”[1] at Harrow, Rugby and Repton.

The founder of Repton School was descended from a long line of merchants
who lived at Chester, then called West Chester, to distinguish it from
Manchester.

His father was a student in the Middle Temple, and, after being called
to the Bar, filled many offices at it. In the year 1525 he was raised to
a Judgeship of the King’s Bench, and was knighted. He married twice, (1)
Margery, daughter of Sir Edward Trafford, and (2) Joan, daughter of John
Fitzherbert, of Etwall, by whom he had a son, John. After the dissolution
of the Monasteries, King Henry VIII. granted to him the Manor, together
with the impropriate Rectory and advowson of the Vicarage of Etwall.
He is said to have taken some part in the foundation of Brasenose
College, Oxford, and, with John Williamson, provided “stipends for two
sufficient and able persons to read and teach openly in the hall, the one
philosophy, the other humanity.”

Of the early days of his son John, nothing is known. He was educated at
Brasenose College, where he was the first lecturer or scholar on his
father’s foundation. At the coronation of King Edward VI. he was made a
Knight of the Bath. Like his father, he married twice. His first wife
was Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Giffard, by whom he had two sons,
who predeceased him, and three daughters—Elizabeth, who married Sir
Thomas Gerard, Knt., of Bryn; Dorothy, who married George Hastings, Earl
of Huntingdon; and Margaret, who married Sir Thomas Stanhope, Knt., of
Shelford. From whom the present hereditary Governors of Repton School,
Lord Gerard, Earl Loudoun, and Earl Carnarvon, trace their descent. His
second wife was Dorothy, daughter of Sir Anthony Fitzherbert, of Norbury,
by whom he had no children. In the year 1553 he was one of the “Knights
of the Shire” for the county of Derby, and served the office of High
Sheriff for the same county in 1554. In August, 1556, he “sat with the
Bishop of the diocese (Ralph Baine) and the rest of the Commissioners,
at Uttoxeter, in Staffordshire, to search out heresies and punish them.”
(Strype, Memorials, vol. III., part 2, p. 15.) Joan Waste, a blind woman,
was tried and found guilty of heresy, and was burnt at the stake in
Derby. By will, dated the 6th of June, 1557, among many other bequests,
he gave and devised to his executors, Sir Thomas Giffard, Richard Harpur,
Thomas Brewster, John Barker, and Simon Starkey, all his lands, tenements
and hereditaments, in Mosley, Abraham, and Brockhurst, in the county of
Lancaster, to find a Priest, well learned and graduate, and of honest
and virtuous conversation, freely to keep a Grammar School in Etwall, or
Repton, also an Usher associate to and with the said master, to keep the
School. The School Master to have yearly twenty pounds, and the Usher ten
pounds. Also that his executors should hold, for the term of seven years
after his decease, his farm called Musden Grange, and with the profits
should find a priest to say Mass, &c., for seven years, and with the
residue of the profits of the stock and farm should build a substantial
school-house with convenient chambers and lodgings for the schoolmaster
and usher in the precinct on the north side of the churchyard of Etwall,
or at Repton, and this being done, without delay, to establish, by the
King and Queen’s license, and other assurances to the School for ever.

He also willed that Sir William Perryn, Bachelor of Divinity, his late
Chaplain, should be (if living and willing) the first Schoolmaster.

As the Report, made to the Charity Commissioners by F. O. Martin, Esq.,
in 1867, says, “Sir John had no property in Repton. His executors were
probably induced to establish the school there, rather than at Etwall, by
finding the remains of the dissolved priory well adapted to the purpose.”

By a deed, dated June 12th, 1557, “Gilbert Thacker of Repton, in
consideration of the sum of £35. 10s., bargained and sold to Richard
Harpur, serjeant-at-law, John Harker, and Simon Starkey, three of Sir
John Porte’s executors, one large great and high house, near the kitchen
of Gilbert Thacker, commonly called the Fermery (Infirmary) (now the
Hall), also one large void room or parcel of ground upon the east
part called the Cloyster, and one other room called the Fratry, (now
destroyed), upon which the Schoolmaster’s lodgings were erected and
builded, with all the rooms, both above and beneath, and inclosed with a
new wall, to the intent that the same should be a schoolhouse and so used
from time to time thereafter.”

Thus was Repton School founded by Sir John Porte. The management seems
to have been in the hands of the Harpurs till the year 1621, when an
agreement was made by Sir John Harpur on the one part, and Henry, Earl of
Huntingdon, Philip, Lord Stanhope, and Sir Thomas Gerard, Bart., on the
other, by which, after the death of Sir John Harpur, the management was
restored to the rightful descendants of the founder.

In 1622, on the petition of the above-mentioned co-heirs of Sir John, by
Royal Letters Patent, bearing date 20th June, 19th Jac., I., a Charter of
Incorporation by the style and title of “The Master of Etwall Hospital,
the School Master of Repton, Ushers, Poor Men, and Poor Scholars,” was
granted. “That, owing to the increased value of the lands and tenements,
it should consist of one Master of the Hospital, one School Master, two
Ushers, twelve Poor Men, and four Poor Scholars, and that Sir John Harpur
should be the first and present Governor and Superintendent of the School
and Hospital, and that after his death the co-heirs should manage them.”
The co-heirs “of their friendliness and goodwill to Sir John Harpur”
petitioned that his heirs should have the election and appointment of
three of the twelve poor men, and one of the poor scholars, which was
also granted, and they continue to do so to this day.”




CHAPTER IX.

REPTON SCHOOL v. GILBERT THACKER.


All Reptonians and visitors to Repton know the two pillars, and low wall
which divide the School yard into two, almost equal, parts. Bigsby and
others believe that the wall is the boundary of the two Manors of Repton.

In the year 1896 I found, in the School muniment chest, among a lot
of musty, fusty documents, deeds, &c., two rolled-up folios, lawyers’
briefs, with interrogations, depositions, &c. On the back of one of the
briefs is a very rough pen and ink sketch-plan of the School buildings,
&c. This has served to identify the various portions occupied by the
School and the Thackers, described in the last chapter, and also gives
the reason why the wall was built. It appears that during the life-time
of Godfrey Thacker, grandson of Gilbert, the destroyer of the Priory,
the “schollers” of Repton School used to annoy him, while working in his
study, by playing too near his house, many rows ensued. These went on
till the days of Godfrey’s son Gilbert: he determined either to put an
end to the annoyances, or to the School, he did not care which, as we
shall see.

In 1652, soon after he succeeded to the estates, he commenced a suit
against the School. Gilbert Thacker, plaintiff, John Jennings, Master of
Etwall Hospital, William Ullock, Headmaster of Repton School, and others,
defendants.

“Plaintiff declared that the defendants the 1st day of December, 1651,
with force and armes the close of the said Gilbert, called the greate or
broade court (the School yard) at Repton did breake and enter and his
grasse there lately growing to the value of one hundred shillings with
their feete walkinge did treade downe and consume to the damage of £40.”

Defendants pleaded not guilty, and produced twelve witnesses, O.R.s and
others, who proved that “the scholemasters used to walke up and downe
the broade court at their pleasures, and the schollers have used to play
there.... That some scholemasters that kept cowes have used to turne
there cowes into the yard. (Mr. Watson stalled them in a room in the
Priory itself!) That Thacker’s father (Godfrey) was a barrister-at-law,
and never questioned it although continually used.”

The matter was settled “out of court,” by the appointment of two
arbitrators, Sir Francis Burdett, Bart., and Sir Samuel Sleigh, Knt.,
(O.R.s), with Gervase Bennett, as referee. They pronounced “theire award
by word of mouth about the yeare 1653.” Thacker was to build a wall
across the Court, beyond which the boys were not allowed to pass. This
he refused to do, so the alleged trespass, and annoyances went on for
another twelve years, when, owing to the conduct of Gilbert, the School
brought an action against him. “The schollers with threats of smites and
blows were affrighted, many of them were assaulted and beaten, many to
avoyd effusion of blood and expenses have absented themselves for a week
together, thro’ fear of arrest, some have withdrawn to other schooles.
If theire hats blew over the “Causey” (the entrance to the School) they
durst not fetch them, if Mr. Thacker was in the way.”

He also employed one Godfrey Kinton, a carpenter, to set up “stoopes
and rayles (post and rails) from the Chancell nooke to the nooke of the
nether School House chinney below the door,” but alas! boys were boys
even then, for we read when “he set up one stoope, and went for more,
before he returned, the stoope was pulled up, and earth thrown into the
hole by the schollers!”

Gilbert also tried in a more offensive way to make the occupants of
the Schoole House “weary of being there.” Down the School yard “uppon
a sudden rush of raine there was usually a water-course through the
Courtyard into Mr. Thacker’s inner court ... and soe under the dogg
kennell to the river.” This course he stopped “with stones and clodds,
and caused the water to run into the School House! twenty-seven or
eight pales-full of water had been ladled out.” When Mr. Ullock (the
Headmaster) complained, and requested that the stones and clods might be
taken away, he was bidden “to take them away himself if he durst, this
the schollers did more than once.”

Mrs. Ullock came in for a share of the “smites and blows.” For, we read,
“one day Gilbert Thacker furiously assaulted Mrs. Ullock as she stood
at her own door, and flung her into the house, followed her and strucke
her.” His wife joined in the fray, “she strucke Mrs. Ullock, and tore her
own gorgett upon a neale.”... “Ann Heyne, being by, interceded for her
mistress, whereupon Gilbert strucke her and felled her to the grounde,
and gave her a foule pinch by the arm, and again strucke Mrs. Ullacke,”
then Mrs. Thacker and her son “ran up to Mr. Ullock’s studdy and told
him that his wife had abused _her_ husband!” So we are not surprised to
hear that the School brought an action against the Thackers. The High
Court of Chancery appointed four gentlemen, as Commissioners, to try the
case. William Bullock (O.R.), Daniel Watson, Esquires, Thomas Charnells,
and Robert Bennett, gentlemen. They met “at the house of Alderman Hugh
Newton, at Derby, there being at the signe of the George.”

There they summoned witnesses to attend; fifty did so, twenty-five a
side. Their depositions, in answer to interrogatories, were taken on
April 15th, 1663, and fill sixty pages of folio. As before mentioned,
they consist of two folios, one for the School and one for Thacker. The
chief questions administered to the witnesses for the School, referred
to their knowledge of the School buildings, Schoolmasters and boys,
Thacker’s ancestors, rights of way, award of Sir Francis Burdett, and Sir
Samuel Sleigh, former suits at law, the Thackers’ conduct, the value of
the land, as grass land, and the use of the yard for recreation by the
boys, &c. For Thacker, the questions asked referred to their knowledge
of prohibitions by his ancestors and himself, and complaints made to the
Schoolmasters, &c.

The depositions are most interesting, as the knowledge of witnesses
extended back to within forty years of the founding of the School.

The number of Schoolmasters varied—in Watson’s time two, in Whitehead’s
three, Schoolmaster, Middle Master, and Usher. The number of boys also
varied from 60 to 200, with “7 or 8 poor schollers.” Among the boys
mentioned were four sons of Philip, first Earl of Chesterfield, Philip,
Charles, George and Ferdinando Stanhope; Michael Folliott, son of Henry
Folyot, Foleott or Ffoliott, Baron of Ballyshannon, Ireland; Wingfield,
Thomas, Vere Essex, and Oliver Cromwell, the four sons of Thomas
Cromwell, first Earl of Ardglass, besides the sons of divers knights and
gentlemen, Sir Francis Burdett, Bart., Sir Samuel Sleigh, Knt., Godfrey
Meynell, Thomas Sanders, William Bullock, &c., &c., most of whom had gone
to the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge. (See _Repton School Register_)

The “Court yard” (School yard) had been used by the boys to recreate
themselves in, without let or hindrance from the defendant’s ancestors.
The award was well known, and agreed to at the time, 1653, but the
defendant had refused to comply with it, and had stopped several ways,
and blocked up a door leading to the brook, from the north-east corner of
the Schoolmaster’s garden.

The evidence of Ann Heyne, &c., referred to above, proved that the
defendant’s conduct had “caused many brawls, and many schollers to be
affrighted and absent themselves from schoole.” The value of the land was
worth from 2d. to 6d. per annum!

The defendant’s witnesses agreed about most of the points in dispute, but
they said the boys had no right to play in the great court yard without
permission, and some of them remembered having been whipped by Godfrey
Thacker and Schoolemaster Watson for so doing, and others remember
playing in “the Staineyard,” by orders of the Schoolemasters Watson and
Whitehead. Defendant also objected to the disposal of ashes, which the
Headmaster used to have placed on a mound opposite his front door, and
the Usher at the back of the Causey (_i.e._ the way between the stone
walls, leading into the old big school) instead of in the garden at the
back of the School, as they used to be put, as one witness said “he had
seen them carried by Mr. Schoolemaster Watson’s daughter!”

The Commissioners “recommended the differences between the two parties
to the Right Honourable Philipp, Earl of Chesterfield, to call the
said parties before him, and to hear and finally determine the said
differences between them if his Worship so can.” Gilbert Thacker again
failed to carryout the terms agreed upon, so on the 11th day of January,
in the 18th year of the reign of Charles II., King, a writ was issued
against him for contempt of court. The writ is in the Muniment Chest,
and it is a rare specimen of a legal document in Latin, written short,
full of abbreviations, very difficult to decipher, as Thacker pleaded in
his answer, “it was written in short lattin, some of the words written
very short, he did not well understand it, nor could say if it was a true
Coppy,” when Mr. Motteram (counsel for the School) delivered it to him,
and read it over to him, but he was wise enough to understand and obey
it eventually, so his contempt was pardoned, and in the following year a
final agreement was made between him and the School.

    (1) The School to build up the way out of the School House
    garden in the north wall, and to give up all rights to go (that
    way) to the Brook.

    (2) Also to give up the Void piece of ground called the
    Slaughter House Yard (now the Hall Garden) between the School
    House and Thacker’s Kitchen.

    (3) A wall was to be built, by both parties, from the Chancel
    north-east Corner, to the north side of the door of the Nether
    School House.

    (4) And the boys were allowed to play between the wall and the
    Greate Gate (the School Arch).

A receipt for £14. 19s. 0d., half the cost of building the wall, signed
by Wm. Jordan, proves the wall, and pillars were built, or finished in
May, 1670, and the long continued disputes ceased.

In Dr. Sleath’s time the gates were removed, and the wall, which at first
was nearly level with the capitals of the pillars, was taken down on the
west side, and lowered on the east, as it is now. This is the history of
the pillars and wall, as recorded in the deeds, &c., lately discovered in
the Muniment Chest, which may contain other interesting details of events
long ago forgotten in the history of Repton School, and may be unearthed
(literally) out of the dust of ages!




CHAPTER X.

REPTON TILE-KILN.


At various times and places within the precincts of Repton Priory tiles
have been dug up. In the year 1851 the British Archæological Association
held a Congress at Derby, and a visit was made to Repton. Its members
examined, among other interesting things, some remarkably fine specimens
of encaustic tiles, which Dr. Peile, then Headmaster, had dug up, on or
about the site of the Priory Church, but it was not till the year 1866
that the kiln itself was discovered. This discovery cannot be better
described than in the words of Dr. Pears, quoted from _The Reliquary_,
January, 1868.

“Through the months of October and November, 1866, the boys of Repton
School were busily engaged in levelling a piece of uneven grass
land within the Old Abbey (Priory) Wall. During the work they came
unexpectedly upon patches of a stiff red clay, quite unlike the ordinary
soil of the place, with here and there fragments of encaustic tiles, such
as have from time to time been found in other parts of the Old Abbey
(Priory) grounds. Presently they found a considerable number of whole
tiles of various patterns, in two rows of layers, placed face downwards.
On the sixth of November they struck upon brickwork, so covered and
choked with the clay and broken tiles that it was extremely difficult
to clear it.” When the accumulated mass of broken tiles and clay had
been cleared away, it proved to be a tile-kiln, “one of the most perfect
mediæval kilns hitherto unearthed in England.” It consisted of two
chambers, side by side, seven feet six inches long, two feet six inches
wide, and about one foot ten inches high. Six arches of chamfered bricks
or tiles, specially made for the purpose, supported a flat roof. Between
the arches were recesses wide enough to receive the tiles placed there to
be burnt, hundreds of which were found piled up one upon another, but, as
they were unburnt, they were soft and pliable, and soon crumbled away.
Among the _débris_, however, many whole tiles and fragments were found,
greatly varying in pattern. The more perfect specimens were placed over
the fire-place in the old “big school,” and formed a most interesting
mantel-piece. When the room was dismantled in 1889 they were taken down
and placed in a cupboard in the inner room till a suitable place can be
found for them.

During the excavations made in 1883-5 on the site of the Priory Church,
many more tiles were discovered which, with many carved stones, have been
affixed to the old north aisle wall, where they can be seen in various
stages of decay, suffering from the effects of exposure to our climate.

Among the tiles discovered in 1866, Mr. Llewellyn Jewitt writes,
(_Reliquary, Jan. 1868_), “are examples different in form, as well as in
material and design, from any others which had come under my notice, made
of light stone-coloured clay, the foliated pattern in very high and bold
relief, and covered with a rich green glaze.” One consists of the crowned
letter M, terminated at either end with a crowned letter A, with foliage,
all in high relief, and green glazed. The letters are the initial ones of
_Ave Maria_, and probably adorned the “Chapel of Our Lady” in the Priory
Church, where one was found during the excavations. Among the _single
tile_ patterns, of which these two are the most beautiful, are many very
curious ones, armorial bearings of England, with label of France, the de
Warrenes, de Burghs, Berkeleys, and Hastings, &c. Alphabet. Fleur-de-lis.
Emblems of Saints Peter and Paul, (Bell, Key, and Sword). Grotesques,
(men, animals, birds, &c.) One, bearing the name Redlington and arms,
which some suppose stand for Bridlington, and the arms of the founder
(Gant) of that priory. Geometrical, Foliage, especially oak leaves, with
acorns. Another is divided into nine square compartments, (stamp used,
intended for smaller tiles,) in the centre a flower, right-hand top
corner, arms of De Warrene, left-hand bottom corner, arms of Berkeley,
the others, a double fleur-de-lis, a cross lozengy between four pellets,
a rabbit, a martlet, and two grotesque animals.

Of _four tile_ patterns there are some good examples, geometrical designs
with foliage (oak leaves), and armorial bearings.

There are also some remarkably rich and beautiful _sixteen tile_
patterns. One has a border of curving foliage between a double circle,
within the circle is a quatre-foil, enclosing a most elegant foliage
design, in the centre is an octagonal flower, in the cusps formed by the
quatre-foil are figures of hares playing, in the corners of the tile are
two pigeons, facing each other, with a cross, with double head, issuing
from their beaks, like Sir John Port’s crest. A second is similar to
this, but the centre is wanting. A third, also circular, still more
elaborate, with dragons in the corners.

There are also some elegant border tiles, with patterns, consisting of
undulating or waving foliage, or birds perched on the side of a straight
branch, with double circles and pellets between them.

Besides these there are some curious examples of tiles simply indented
or stamped, with circles and foliage, and painted within the pattern
with green glaze, not filled with “slip,” as the liquid clay was called,
and two have a pattern which has evidently been cut or incised with some
sharp instrument, not stamped as all the rest have been.

The size of the tiles varies from 10 inches square to 2½ inches square,
by 1¾ inches to 1 inch thick. The body-clay is red, the patterns are
filled in with white or yellow “slip,” which is brushed or poured over
the face of the tile, then the “slip” is scraped off the surface of the
tile, leaving “slip” in the pattern. Glazes of various colours, green,
yellow, buff, brown, &c. The stamps were most probably made of wood, and
vary in size.

The discovery of the tile-kiln enabled Llewellyn Jewitt to _localise_
the manufacture of tiles which he had examined in various churches in
Derbyshire, especially at Newton Solney, Thurgaton Priory, and Bakewell.
A larger tile-kiln was discovered at Dale Abbey, about thirty-eight years
ago, close to the ruins of the gatehouse of that Abbey.

The comparison of the tiles, made there and at Repton, forms another link
between them, and proves that, at least, similar stamps were used in the
production of the tiles, and it may be, as suggested by Mr. John Ward,
F.S.A., (“Mediæval Pavement and Wall Tiles of Derbyshire,” Vol. XIV., of
the “Derbyshire Archæological Journal,”) “that stamps were passed on from
tilery to tilery, or that companies of tile-wrights, carrying about with
them their stamps, &c., temporarily settled down at places where tileries
existed.”

[Illustration: Plate 10.

Repton School Chapel. (Page 77.)

Mr. Exham’s House.]




CHAPTER XI.

REPTON SCHOOL TERCENTENARY AND FOUNDING OF THE SCHOOL CHAPEL, &c.


The year 1857 was a memorable one for Repton School, for three hundred
years it had existed with varied progress.

A goodly company of Old Reptonians assembled to commemorate the event on
Tuesday the 11th of August. They dined together in the old “big school,”
the Honourable George Denman presided, and was supported by the Masters
of Etwall Hospital, and Repton School, and many others.

The next day a much larger number of invited guests arrived. They again
assembled in the “big school.” At eleven o’clock the Right Honourable
Earl Howe, Chairman of the Governors of Etwall Hospital and Repton School
arrived, the head boy, W. L. Mugliston, delivered a Latin speech. The
Headmaster, Dr. Pears, read an account of the Founder, and founding of
the Hospital and School, of its incorporation by royal charter, granted
by King James I. in 1622, and subsequent benefactions to the School.
He, further, gave an address on the principles, objects, and practical
working of the School, and other kindred institutions. After this all
proceeded to the Church, where they were received by the Incumbent of
Repton, the Rev. W. Williams. The prayers were read by him, and the
Headmaster, the lessons by the Rev. G. M. Messiter, and the Rev. G. P.
Clarke. The sermon was preached by Dr. Vaughan, the Headmaster of Harrow,
the text chosen was Romans XI. 36, “For of Him, and through Him, and to
Him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen.”

After the service the visitors, &c., had luncheon in the “big school,” a
few speeches were made, and the Rev. T. Woodrooffe, Canon of Winchester,
a parent, suggested that a lasting memorial of that day should be a
School Chapel, a most liberal response was made to the appeal.

Hitherto the School had worshipped in the Church, but increasing numbers
had made “the building of a school chapel,” as Dr. Pears said, “no longer
a matter of choice, but of necessity.” A site within the arch was applied
for, but without success: at last the present site was procured, and on
August 26th, 1858, in the presence of a large number of visitors, the
foundation stone was laid. After a special service, Dr. Pears presented a
silver trowel to Earl Howe, who, striking the stone twice with a mahogany
mallet, said, “In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I declare
this stone duly laid.”

Underneath the stone a bottle was placed containing various coins of the
realm, and a parchment, bearing the following memoranda:—

                           Stet Fortuna Domus.
                          REPTON SCHOOL CHAPEL.
      In commemoration of the 300th Anniversary of the Foundation of
                   SIR JOHN PORT’S SCHOOL AND HOSPITAL.
               The first stone was laid August 26th, 1858,
                    By RICHARD WILLIAM PENN EARL HOWE,
               Acting Governor of the School and Hospital.
             Hereditary Governors of the School and Hospital:
               EARL HOWE, for Marquis of Hastings, a minor;
                 EARL CHESTERFIELD; SIR R. GERARD, Bart.
                Master of the Hospital—REV. W. E. MOUSLEY;
               Headmaster of the School—S. A. PEARS, D.D.;
                     First Usher—REV. G. M. MESSITER.
                     Second Usher—REV. G. P. CLARKE.

BUILDING COMMITTEE.

  Hon. G. Denman.
  Dr. Pears.
  Rev. W. E. Mousley.
  Rev. G. M. Messiter.
  Rev. G. P. Clarke.
  A. Hewgill, Esq., M.D.
  T. P. Bainbrigge, Esq.
  A. N. Mosley, Esq.
  I. Clay, Esq.
  B. W. Spilsbury, Esq.
  Rev. J. F. Bateman.
  Rev. E. J. Selwyn.
  Rev. J. Davies.
  C. Worthington, Esq.

Architect—I. H. STEVENS.

Builders—Messrs. LILLEY & ELLIOTT.


SCHOOL CHAPEL.

The Chapel originally consisted of nave and two transepts, with a
five-light window in the east end. In 1867 a semi-octagonal apse was
added at the east end, in memory of Mrs. Pears, who died in April, 1866.
In 1880 the nave was extended, two bays, westwards, and an organ, built
by Messrs. Gray and Davidson, was fixed to its west wall. In 1884-5 a
south aisle was added, the organ removed to its east end, the middle
window inserted in the west wall of the nave, and gas was introduced. The
style of the building is Perpendicular.

To the memory of Masters, Boys, &c., many of the windows in the apse,
south transept, south aisle, and nave, have been filled with stained
glass, most of them by Messrs. J. Powell and Sons, of Whitefriars, London.

The windows in the apse, three pairs of lights, are full-length figures
of Moses and John the Baptist, two of Our Lord, and S.S. Peter and Paul.
Beneath the figures are medallions illustrating an event in their lives;
(1) Moses striking the rock, (2) John baptizing our Lord, (3) Jesus in
the home at Nazareth, (4) Jesus with S.S. Peter, James and John, (5) S.S.
Peter and John at “the gate Beautiful,” (6) S. Paul preaching at Athens.

    IN MEMORIAM HENRICI ROBERTI HUCKIN HANC FENESTRAM AMICI
    POSUERUNT.

In the south transept, a beautiful little window, our Lord with an infant
in His lap.

    TO THE GLORY OF GOD, AND IN LOVING MEMORY OF E.S.F. 30TH SEP.
    1887.

In the south aisle are six pairs of lights, with full-length figures and
medallions, illustrating the Beatitudes.

    (1) “Blessed are the meek.” (Moses and S. Timothy.)

    PLACED BY MANY SCHOOL AND COLLEGE FRIENDS IN MEMORY OF R. S.
    MURRAY SMITH, WHO DIED AT ORIEL COLLEGE OXFORD 17TH NOV. 1886.
    AGED 21.

    (2) “Blessed are the pure in heart.” (Daniel and S. John.)

    IN MEMORY OF EDWARD PREST, M.A., MASTER AT THIS SCHOOL FROM
    1880-87. DIED OCT. 18, 1893.

    (3) “Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
    righteousness.” (David and S. Paul.)

    EUSTACE MACLEOD FORBES. BORN NOV. 21, 1862. DIED FEB. 11, 1894.

    (4) “Blessed are the merciful.” (Joseph and S. Barnabas.)

    FRANCIS HAMAR ELLIOT. BORN AP. 19, 1875. DIED SEP. 6, 1894.

    (5) “Blessed are they which are persecuted.” (Abel and S.
    Stephen.)

    IN LOVING MEMORY OF EUSTACE GEORGE DAVID MAXWELL. WHO DIED DEC.
    22, 1884. AGED 18.

    (6) “Blessed are the peacemakers.” (Abraham and S. James.)

    IN THANKFUL MEMORY OF HENRY HUGHES DOBINSON, ARCHDEACON OF THE
    NIGER. WHO AFTER SERVING GOD AS A BOY AT THIS SCHOOL DIED IN
    HIS MASTER’S SERVICE AT ASABA. AP. 13TH, 1897. AGED 33 YEARS.

At the west end of the south aisle is a three-light window. Subject:
“Christ the Light of the World.”

    IN DEI GLORIAM EX AMORE HUJUS SACELLI JOSEPHUS ET JOHANNES
    GOULD HANC FENESTRAM INSERENDAM CURAVERUNT A.S. MDCCCLXXXV.

The rose window in the west end of the nave was placed there by E.
Estridge, Esq., in 1881.

The three lights below representing Faith, Hope, and Charity.

    (1) IN DEI GLORIAM UNUS E MAGISTRIS. (2) IN MEMORIAM JOHANNIS
    DOUGLAS BINNEY HUJUS SCHOLÆ E MAGISTRIS OB. ID. JUN.
    MDCCCLXXXIII. (3) IN DEI GLORIAM REPANDUNENSES.

At the east end of the nave is a beautiful window with angels and flowers.

    “IN THE BLESSED HOPE OF EVERLASTING LIFE WE DEDICATE THIS
    WINDOW TO THE MEMORY OF OUR DEARLY LOVED SON FREDERICK WILLIAM
    HESSE WHO FELL ASLEEP AT REPTON MAR. 16, 1895. AGED 14 YEARS.
    A. AND M. H.”

On the walls in the apse are three brasses in memory of three
Headmasters—Drs. Peile, Pears and Huckin. In the choir are brasses in
memory of Mr. Messiter, Mr. Johnson and Mr. Latham, Assistant Masters.

In the south transept a brass in memory of the Right Honble. George
Denman.

Mrs. Huckin presented the brass lectern to the Chapel in 1880.

In 1884 a bell, bearing the following inscription,

    DEO D.D. TRES ARCHIDIDASCALI FILIOLÆ,

was placed in the chapel turret.

On the nave walls are brasses in memory of the following boys:—C. P.
Aylmer, J. H. P. Lighton, J. A. Barber, C. F. Blagg, N. Baskerville
Mynors, H. Goodwin Brooks, F. Levy, A. S. Darrock, J. Stratford Collins.

On the outside of the Chapel, round the three sides of the apse, and
along the south side, are the following inscriptions:—

    AD MAJOREM DEI GLORIAM ET E. T. P. DESIDERATISSIMÆ IN MEMORIAM
    A.S. MDCCCLXVII.

    DEO SERVATORI HANC ÆDEM SCHOLÆ REPANDUNENSIS PER ANNOS CCC
    INCOLUMIS PRÆSIDES ALUMNI AMICI POSUERUNT A.S. MDCCCLVIII.
    AUGENDAM. CURAVERUNT A.S. MDCCCLXXX.

[Illustration: Plate 11.

Repton Hall, from the North. (Page 81.)

Porter’s Lodge. (Page 86.)]




CHAPTER XII.

SCHOOL HOUSES, &c.


For over two hundred years Repton School was held in the Priory, the
“School Master” lodged at its north end, and the “Usher” at its south.
Between “the lodgings” was the school-room, known to many generations
of Reptonians as the “big school.” A smaller room was built on to this,
with a door of communication between them, this room used to be divided
into two, the upper end was the Headmaster’s study, and the lower end the
School library.

During the eighteenth century a large number of boys, who came from a
distance, used “to table,” that is lodge, in the village.

On January 8th, of the year 1728, Mary Thacker died, leaving Repton Hall
to Sir Robert Burdett, Bart., of Foremark. It is supposed that the School
acquired the Hall, as a residence for the Headmaster, about this time.

Repton Hall, originally an isolated brick tower, two storeys high, with
hexagonal turrets in the upper storey, was built by Prior Overton during
the reign of Henry VIth (1422-1461), and was called Prior Overton’s
Lodge, but as the Prior, according to the Statutes, was obliged to
reside in the Priory itself, moreover the Prior’s chamber is named in
the Inventory (p. 58), “there can be little doubt,” as Mr. St John Hope
writes (_Vol. VI., Derbyshire Archæological Journal, p. 96_), “the
building was really the infirmitorium, or abode of sick and infirm
monks.” Like all the other ancient buildings in Repton, additions and
restorations have quite changed it. The Thackers added to it when they
obtained possession in 1539, and built its southern side during the reign
of William and Mary. The only unaltered part is the brick tower, except
its top which used to be castellated, (see picture in Bigsby’s Hist.,
Plate 1.)

The lower storey of it, now the kitchen, has a fine oak ceiling divided
into nine square compartments by oak beams, at the intersections there
are four carved bosses bearing (1) a name device, or rebus of Prior
Overton a tun or cask, encircled by the letter =O=, formed by a vine
branch with leaves and grapes, (2) a capital =T= ornamented with leaves,
(3) an =S= similarly ornamented, (4) a sheep encircled like No. 1. The
letters =T= and =S= are supposed to be the initials of former priors.

“The lofty staircase of majestic oak, dim-lighted by an ancient window,
filled with narrow panes of deep-discoloured glass,” is now brightened
with a stained glass window, which was presented and placed in the School
Library by Dr. Sleath on his retirement from the headmastership in 1830.
It contains armorial bearings of the Founder, and three Hereditary
Governors of Repton School, the Earls of Huntingdon, and Chesterfield,
and Sir John Gerard.

The window was removed to the Hall by Dr. Peile, with Dr. Sleath’s
knowledge.

Dr. Prior, Headmaster from 1767-79, raised the number of boys to over two
hundred, and it is generally thought that he was the first to occupy the
Hall. The School Register was so badly kept, or not kept at all, it is
difficult to say how many there were with any certainty. When Dr. Pears
was appointed in 1854 there were only forty-eight boys in the School,
in three years the number was one hundred and eight, and soon it became
necessary to build more houses, the difficulty was to obtain sites. The
Tercentenary of Repton School, 1857, proved to be a fresh starting point
in its history. A site for the School Chapel was applied for within the
Arch, but in vain, at last the piece of land on which it stands, was
obtained with a further piece at the back of it, on this Dr. Pears built
a house for Mr. Johnson, who opened it in the year 1860.

[Illustration: Plate 12.

Pears Memorial Hall Window. (Page 83.)]

The Rev. E. Latham opened his house about the same time. It had formerly
been a malt house and cottages.

Dr. Pears bought the “Old Mitre Inn” and converted it into a house for
the Rev. Joseph Gould in 1865.

In 1869 a house, built by Mr. Estridge, was opened.

In 1871, the Rev. G. P. Clarke (now Clucas) moved from the south end
of the Priory, and opened the house in which he now lives, in 1883 he
resigned his mastership, and his boys were transferred to other houses.

In 1880, another Inn (“New Mitre”) was converted into a house, and
occupied by the Rev. A. F. E. Forman.

In 1885, Mr. Gurney built his house.

The Pears Memorial Hall, and rooms beneath it, built on the site of the
Priory Chapel, were opened on Speech Day, June 17th, 1886. The Hall is
one hundred and one feet long, by forty-three feet wide, with a fine
open roof, forty feet high, supported by wall pieces, with hammer beams,
which rest on corbels of stone, carved to represent shields. The walls
are lined with oak panelling, seven feet high, on them the names of
O.R.s who have gained honours at the Universities are being painted. At
the west end there is a magnificent three-manual organ, by Brindley and
Foster of Sheffield, on either side and in front are raised seats and
platform, which form an orchestra capable of seating one hundred and
twenty performers. At the east end is a large window of fifteen lights,
five in a row, filled with stained glass by Messrs. James Powell and
Sons, of Whitefriars, London. The lights of the window illustrate the
history of Repton from earliest times. Beginning with the top five (1)
St Chad, bishop of Mercia, founder of the See of Lichfield, A.D. 669.
(2) St. Guthlac, once an inmate of Repton Abbey. (3) Matilda, Countess
of Chester, foundress of Repton Priory, circa 1150. (4) St. Wereburga,
(daughter of King Wulphere), said to be the first Abbess of Repton. (5)
St. Wystan, (murdered by his cousin Berfurt at Wistanstowe, A.D. 850),
buried at Repton, patron saint of its church.

The middle five contain armorial bearings of (1) The See of Lichfield.
(2) Philip and Mary, in whose reign the School was founded. (3) Sir John
Porte, the founder of the School. (4) James I., who granted a Charter to
the School. (5) The See of Southwell.

The bottom five full-length figures of (1) Sir Thomas Gerard. (2)
George Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon. (3) Sir John Porte. (4) Sir Thomas
Stanhope. (5) Sir Richard Harpur. 1, 2, and 4 married Sir John Porte’s
three daughters, and are now represented by Lord Gerard, Earl of Loudoun,
Earl of Carnarvon, 5, one of his executors, ancestor of Sir Vauncey
Harpur-Crewe, these four are Hereditary Governors of Repton School and
Etwall Hospital.

Under the window, on a brass tablet, is the following inscription:—

                              HANC FENESTRAM
                      REPANDUNENSIBUS REPANDUNENSIS
                           JOHANNES GOULD. A.M.
                             A. S. MDCCCXCIV.
                               DONO DEDIT.

The principal entrance to the Hall is up a staircase in the tower at the
east end, there is also an entrance at the west end.

Beneath the Hall are four Class-rooms, a “Common-room” for the Masters,
and lavatories. The rooms open into a Cloister which is on the south
side of the building. The Governing Body of Repton School paid for the
rooms below out of the School funds, the Hall itself being paid for by
friends, old pupils, &c., of Dr. Pears. The architect was Sir Arthur
Blomfield, A.R.A., and the style, Perpendicular. On June 17th, 1886, The
Honble. Mr. Justice Denman, (O.R.,) presided at the opening, and declared
the Hall opened in these words, “I declare this Schoolroom, which has
been built in the faith of Jesus Christ, and in memory of His servant,
Steuart Adolphus Pears, to be now open.” Then, after a few dedicatory
prayers, and the singing of the “Old Hundredth,” speeches were delivered
by Mr. Denman, Rev. W. Johnson, (the Senior Assistant Master), Mr.
Etherington-Smith, and the Rev. J. H. Clay, O.R.s, and the Headmaster
(the Rev. W. M. Furneaux).

[Illustration: Plate 13.

Mr. Cattley’s and Mr. Forman’s Houses.

Mr. Gould’s House.]

Over the door at the east end is a brass tablet bearing the following
inscription:—

                      IN HONOREM PRÆCEPTORIS OPTIMI
                       STEUART ADOLPHI PEARS S.T.P.
            SCHOLÆ REPANDUNENSI PROPE VIGINTI ANNOS PRÆPOSITI
          UT INSIGNIA EJUS ERGA SCHOLAM ILLAM ANTIQUAM BENEFICIA
        MONUMENTO PERPETUO IN MEMORIAM REVOCARENTUR HOC ÆDIFICIUM
              AMICI ET DISCIPULI EJUS EXTRUENDUM CURAVERUNT.
                            A. S. MDCCCLXXXVI.

Portraits of Drs. Sleath, Peile, Pears, and Huckin, adorn its walls.

In 1888 the block of four Form rooms on the east side of the Priory was
built, and a year later the old “Big School” was dismantled, its floor
and ceiling were covered with oak, and, later on, its walls were panelled
with oak, and shelves of the same material were affixed to them, it
was fitted up with oak tables and seats, as a Sixth Form library. The
inner room is about to be similarly fitted up. How former generations of
O.R.s would stare if they could see the accommodation for the present
Sixth Form! When Dr. Bigsby was a boy at School “the chair and desk of
the Headmaster were under the canopy of time-stained oak, on a raised
stage or platform,” at the north end of the room, “ascended, on either
side, by steps. The space thus separated from the floor beneath was
formerly enclosed in the manner of a pew, and contained seats for the
accommodation of nearly the whole of the Sixth or head form. The approach
was by a door at either side, situate above the steps.” This “pew,” much
to the sorrow of the Dr., was removed in the year 1821.

In 1883-4 roof was raised, and new “studies” were built at the Hall.
During the last ten years additional blocks of class rooms, laboratories,
fives-courts, and a Porter’s Lodge (the gift of the present Headmaster)
have been added.

The last improvement is now (1899) being made. In the year 1890 the
Governors acquired the freehold of the “Hall Orchard,” at its south end
a Sanatorium was erected and opened in the year 1894. The “Orchard,”
owing to the unevenness of its surface, could not be used, properly,
for games, so subscriptions for levelling it were asked for, O.R.s and
others responded, as usual, in a very liberal manner, and the work was
commenced at the end of last year. When finished there will be three fine
“pitches,” one across the south end, and two, divided by a terrace, from
it and themselves, down the remaining part of the “Orchard.” Owing to the
unevenness referred to it was impossible to make it of one level.

[Illustration: Plate 14.

Mr. Estridge’s House.

Mr. Gurney’s House.]




CHAPTER XIII.

CHIEF EVENTS REFERRED TO, OR DESCRIBED.


  A.D.

  584-93  The Kingdom of Mercia founded, Creoda its first King.

  652     Peada, son of Penda, converted to Christianity, p. 8.

  655-6   Penda, K. of Mercia, slain at Winwaedfield by Oswin, p. 8.

  c. 656  Repton Abbey founded, p. 8.

  657     Bishop Duima died, “buried among the Middle Angles at Feppingum”
            (Repton?) p. 8.

  660     Eadburgh, daughter of Aldulf, K. of East Angles, Abbess, p. 9.

  672     Guthlac enters the Abbey, pp. 9-12.

  c. 695  Ælfrida = (Ælfthryth), Abbess, pp. 9-12.

  755     Æthebald, K. of Mercia, slain at Seccadune (Seckington, nr.
            Tamworth), buried at Repton, pp. 6-9.

  781     Cyneheard, buried at Repton, p. 9.

  835     Cynewaru, Abbess of Repton, p. 9.

  839     Wiglaf, K. of Mercia, buried at Repton, p. 9.

  849-50  Wystan, son of Wimund, murdered at Wistanstowe, Shropshire,
            by his cousin Berfert, the body was brought to Repton, and
            buried by the side of his grandfather Wiglaf, p. 15.

  874     The Danes came to Repton, left again in 875, having destroyed
            Repton Monastery, &c., p. 9.

  c. 957  Repton Church built, p. 9.

  c. 1034  Canute transfers the relics of St. Wystan to Evesham Abbey,
            p. 9.

  1086     Repton is mentioned in Domesday Book as having a church, two
            priests, and two mills, p. 9.

  1172     The Canons of Calke transferred to Repton Priory, which had
            been built by Maud, Countess of Chester, a few years before,
            c. 1150, p. 10.

  1207     A portion of St. Wystan’s relics returned to the Canons of
            Repton, p. 16.

  1330     The owners of the Manor of Repton claimed to be lords of the
            hundred, and to have within their manor a pillory, tumbrell,
            and gallows, for the punishment of criminals; they also
            claimed, by prescription, a market at Repton on Wednesday,
            and a fair on the 1st of July.

  1337-77  Repton Church enlarged to its present size, p. 20.

  1538     Repton Priory dissolved, granted to Thomas Thacker in 1539,
            destroyed by his son Gilbert in 1553, p. 53.

  1557     Sir John Porte founded Repton School, pp. 61-63.

  1622     A Royal Charter granted by King James I. incorporating Etwall
            Hospital and Repton School, p. 64.

  1643     The Inhabitants of Repton and other parishes protest against
            the marauding excursions of the Parliamentary forces, under
            Sir John Gell, quartered at Derby, p. 5.

  1654     Thomas Whitehead, 1st Usher of Repton School, founded the
            Whitehead Charity.

  1657     Ralph Hough Charity founded.

  1687     The grave, with stone coffin, skeletons, &c., discovered in
            Allen’s close, p. 5.

  1697     Mary Burdett Charity founded.

  1699     The river Trent made navigable, up to Burton-on-Trent, by
            Act of Parliament.

  1706     William Gilbert Charity founded.

  1717     Dorothy Burdett’s Charity founded.

  1719     A singer’s gallery erected at the west end of the Church, p. 21.

  1721     The Church spire rebuilt by John Platt and Ralph Tunnicliffe.

  1736     William Hunt’s Charity founded.

  1749     Richard Coming’s Charity founded.

  1766     The “Common” fields enclosed by Act of Parliament.

  1779     The Crypt of Repton Church discovered! p. 21.

  1784     The upper part of the Church spire, which had been struck by
            lightning, rebuilt by Mr Thompson of Lichfield.

  1792     The Church restored, p. 21.

  1802     Repton volunteers enrolled (150).

  1804     The weather-cock on the spire repaired by Joseph Barton.

  1805     Navigation on Trent ceased, transferred to Trent and Mersey
            Canal.

  1806     The old square shaft of Repton Cross replaced by the present
            round one.

  1815     The Methodist Chapel built.

  1836     The Independent Chapel built.

    ”      Willington Bridge begun, opened in 1839.

  1838     The Church School-room built by public subscription.

  1839     A two-edged sword, and a large quantity of human bones found,
            whilst digging out the foundations of the culvert bridge over
            the “Old Trent.”

  1842-8   Galleries on the north and south sides of the Church built,
            p. 22.

  1843     A troop of yeomanry raised.

  1851     The British Archæological Association visited Repton, from
            Derby.

  1854     The two round Saxon arches and piers removed, replaced by the
            two pointed arches, and hexagonal piers, p. 22.

    ”      Repton Institute opened.

  1857     Repton School Tercentenary, p. 75.

  1857     Repton Gas Company established.

  1858     Repton School Chapel founded, p. 76.

  1866     Tile Kiln discovered on the Paddock, p. 71.

  1867     School Chapel enlarged by the addition of an apse, in memory
            of Mrs. Pears, p. 77.

  1868     A new clock in the Church, also in her memory.

  1874     Dr. Pears resigned, and Mr. Messiter died.

    ”      Dr. Huckin, headmaster.

  1880     School Chapel extended about twenty feet to the west, p. 77.

  1883     Dr. Huckin died. Rev. W. M. Furneaux succeeded.

  1884-5   South Aisle added to School Chapel, p. 77.

  1886     Pears School opened on Speech Day, June 17th, by the Hon Mr.
            Justice Denman, (O.R.), p. 83.

    ”      Repton Church restored, p. 23.

  1887     Engineering Works established by W. Stephenson Peach, Esq.

  1888     The block of Form rooms erected on the east side of the Priory.

  1889-91  Old “Big School” converted into “Sixth Form Library,” p. 85.

  1890     Freehold of Hall Orchard purchased, and Cricket Pavilion
            enlarged.

  1891     Freehold of Hall and Cricket Field purchased.

  1894     New Sanatorium opened.

  1896     Porter’s Lodge built.

  1897     New Fives’ Courts made.

  1898     Willington Bridge made free for ever, on August 1st.

  1899     Hall Orchard levelled.

[Illustration: Plate 15.

Cricket Pavilion, Pears Hall, &c.]




CHAPTER XIV.

THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF REPTON.


The neighbourhood of Repton is full of objects of interest for the
antiquary, geologist, botanist, or the lover of the picturesque.

Beginning with Repton, with its church, camp, &c., which date back to
the 9th century, down to Stretton with its most beautiful 19th century
church, the antiquary will find many objects of interest. The geologist
will find much to interest him in the gypsum quarries and mines at
Chellaston Hill, and the carboniferous limestone quarries at Tickenhall,
Calke, and Breedon Hill. In the pages of “Contributions to the Flora
of Derbyshire,” by the Rev. W. H. Painter, the botanist will find a
list of plants, &c., to be found in the neighbourhood. The lover of the
picturesque will find much to please him in the varied scenery of the
valley of the Trent, and its numerous tributaries. The views from such
points as Askew Hill, Bretby Clump, King’s Newton and Breedon Hill, are
scarcely to be equalled in any county of England. The plan adopted in the
following descriptions of towns, &c., is to group together those which
lie close to one another, so that the visitor may visit them together in
his walk or drive. All are within about eight miles of Repton.


ASHBY-DE-LA-ZOUCH.

What reader of “Ivanhoe” does not remember one scene, at least, in that
well-known romance, “The Gentle and Joyous Passage of Arms of Ashby,”
which has shed such a lasting halo of chivalry over that town? Sir Walter
Scott had often stayed with Sir George Beaumont, at Coleorton Hall, and,
no doubt, had visited all the places connected with the history of the
locality. The Castle of Ashby in which “Prince John held high festival,”
as Sir Walter writes, “is not the same building of which the stately
ruins still interest the traveller,” but the description given of the
field in which the tournament was held, corresponds, in a most minute
manner, with the “Tournament Field,” still so called, at the neighbouring
village of Smisby, and has for ages been identified with that famous
“Passage of Arms.” Eight miles south-east of Repton this very interesting
“habitation among the ash trees” is situated.

The first authentic mention we have of it is about the year 1066, when
William the Conqueror granted the Manor to Hugh de Grentemaisnel, one
of his most valiant captains at the battle of Hastings. In Domesday
Book we read of its having a priest and church. Soon afterwards it fell
into the hands of Robert de Beaumeis, another Norman, whose successor,
Philip, granted “the church of St. Helen of Ashby, with the church of
Blackfordby,” &c., &c., to the Abbey of Lilleshall, Salop. Philip de
Beaumeis, having no son to succeed him, left his estates to his daughter
Adeliza, who married Alan la Zouche, a descendant of the Earls of
Brittany. Alan settled at Ashby, and added the family name to it, to
distinguish it from the other towns of that name. Alan was succeeded by
his son Roger, who was succeeded by his son Alan, the last of the real
Zouches, in the male line, who held the Manor of Ashby, he granted it
to Sir William Mortimer, a distant relative, who assumed the name, and
passed it on to his son Alan, who fought at the battle of Creçy, 1346,
and died in that year, he was succeeded by his son Hugh, who died in
1399, leaving no heir, with him the name, finally, became extinct.

[Illustration: Plate 16.

Ashby Castle. (Page 92.)

Staunton Harold. (Page 135.)]

The property was held by Sir Hugh Burnett for about twenty years, when
James Butler, Earl of Ormond (a Lancastrian noble), by some means or
other, obtained possession of the land, he was executed at Newcastle
after the battle of Towton Moor in 1461. In that year Edward, Duke of
York, became King, and rewarded his partisans with titles and grants of
land. Among them was Sir William Hastings, whom he created Baron Hastings
of Ashby, &c., Steward of Leicester, and ambassador, with the Earl of
Warwick, to treat for peace with Louis XI., King of France, who gave him
a pension of 2000 crowns per annum. The first payment was made in gold,
which Lord Hastings is said to have received with these words, “Put it
here into my sleeve; for other testimonial (receipt) you shall get none:
no man shall say that King Edward’s Lord Chamberlain hath been pensioner
to the French King.” This _may_ be the origin of the crest of the
Hastings’ family, a maunch or sleeve. King Edward also gave him “licence
to enclose and impark 3000 acres of land and wood at Ashby-de-la-Zouch,”
and to erect and fortify houses, &c., there and elsewhere. In the year
1474 he built Ashby Castle, nine years later the Protector (Richard, Duke
of Gloucester) accused him of high treason, and, without trial, had him
beheaded on a log of wood on Tower Green. His remains were interred in
Windsor Castle, where a splendid monument was erected to his memory.

As we are not writing a history of the Hastings family, we must confine
ourselves to those members of that family connected with the history of
the place, which for two centuries centred round its castle and church.
Ashby Castle was, as we have seen, built by the first Lord Hastings in
1474. It stands on the south side of the town. Judging by its ruins, it
must have been indeed a stately pile. Entering from the west we see
the remains of the kitchen, with its fire-places, &c.; it had a groined
roof, over which were rooms, with another storey over them, access to
these was obtained by a spiral staircase in the north-east corner of the
kitchen. The west front of this block has been destroyed, so nothing can
be written about its chief entrance, its height is about seventy feet,
the dimensions of the kitchen are fifty feet long, by twenty-seven broad,
and thirty-seven feet high.

In the kitchen are two doorways leading into the “servants hall,” from
this two doorways lead into the Great Hall, and from this admission was
obtained to a “drawing room.” At the end of this room, a little to the
south, is the chapel, lit by four windows, on either side, and an east
window. At the west end, over the west door, is a gallery, to which a
spiral staircase leads. Adjoining the east end, to the south of it,
were rooms for the chaplain. On the south is a courtyard formed by the
chapel, chaplain’s rooms, a thick wall, and the Great Tower. This tower
must have been an imposing building of, at least, four storeys, with
cellar, kitchen, dining hall, drawing room, and sleeping apartments. Its
southern half is destroyed, but what is left on the north side—turrets,
windows, fire-place, armorial bearings, &c., prove how richly the fabric
was sculptured over. Very probably there was a wall from the Great
Tower on its west side, like that on its east side, which met a wall
built out from the kitchen. The ground plan of the Castle would form a
parallelogram with kitchen, servants’ hall, great hall, drawing room, and
chapel on the north side, chaplain’s room at the east end, Great Tower,
with walls on the south side, and a wall and kitchen at the west end. A
subterraneous passage connects the kitchen with the Great Tower.

The chief historical events connected with the Castle are the visit of
Mary, Queen of Scots, in November of the year 1569. She was on her way
from Tutbury to Coventry. Anne, wife of James I., and Prince Henry were
entertained at the Castle in June, 1603, and King James himself paid the
Earl a visit in the year 1617. The expenses of this visit were so great,
the Earl’s income became seriously diminished, as one of his descendants,
Lady Flora, daughter of the 1st Marquis of Hastings wrote, _a propos_ of
the visit,

    The bells did ring,
    The gracious King
    Enjoyed his visit much;
    And we’ve been poor
    Ere since that hour
    At Ashby-de-la-Zouch.

Again in May, 1645, another Stuart was a guest at Ashby. Charles I.,
flushed with the success of his army at Leicester, spent a short time at
the Castle. Fifteen days later, June 14th, he came again, this time a
fugitive from the fatal and final battle of Naseby Field. The Royalist
garrison yielded Leicester, and marched out, the Governor Hastings (Lord
Loughborough) to Ashby, the officers and men to Lichfield. For months
the Parliamentary army, under Sir Thomas Fairfax, beseiged the town
and castle, which held out bravely for the Royal cause. On the 28th
February, 1646, articles of agreement were drawn up, and signed by Lord
Loughborough, and Colonel Needham. The articles consisted of eleven
“items.” The officers and soldiers were “to march away to Bridgenorth or
Worcester, with their horses, arms, and ammunition, bag, and baggage,
trumpets sounding, drums beating, colours flying,” &c., or they might
“lay down their arms, and have protection to live at home if they
please,” “and the works and fortifications of the town and garrison
should be sleighted,” “after which the sequestrations of Colonel General
Hastings, the Earl of Huntingdon, should be taken off,” or “the Colonel
General, with the said gentlemen, could go to Hull or Bristol to have
a ship provided to transport them to France or Holland, whither they
please.” In 1648 the “sleighting” of the Castle was performed, only
too well, by one William Bainbrigg, of Lockington, in the county of
Leicester. On the north side of the Castle was a green, on the south a
garden, a wall, still existing, surrounded it with towers of brick, with
stone facings, used as summer-houses, or “look outs.” On the east of the
Castle is a triangular tower, triangular in shape, called the “Mount
House,” it is said to be connected with the kitchen by a subterraneous
passage. The “Manor House” on the north-east side, occupies the site of a
suite of apartments made to accommodate King James I. in the year 1617.

Ashby Church, dedicated to St. Helen, occupies the site of an earlier
building, probably Norman. During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
it was rebuilt, and consisted of chancel, nave, north and south aisles,
with tower at the west end. During the last twenty-three years nearly
£16,000. have been spent in enlarging and restoring it. Now it consists
of nave with two aisles on its north and south sides, all the galleries
have been removed, and the old pews have been replaced by well-designed
oak seats. The choir stalls are placed at the east end of the nave,
leaving the chancel unoccupied. Over the altar there is a fine reredos
of oak, ascribed to Grinling Gibbons. On the south side of the chancel
is the mortuary chapel of the Huntingdon family. A most magnificent tomb
of Francis, 2nd Earl of Huntingdon, and his wife Katherine, occupies the
centre of it. Every detail of it is well worth a very close inspection.
There are also many mural tablets in the chapel.

Within a sculptured recess in the north wall of the church is a finely
executed figure of a pilgrim. Lying on his back, the head rests on a
cushion, just above the right shoulder a portion of a pilgrim’s hat with
scallop-shell is seen. Round the shoulders, and over the breast, is the
collar of SS. The figure is clothed with a long cloak, the feet, which
rest on a dog, are shod with laced boots with pointed toes. Across the
body is a pilgrim’s staff, clasped by the left fore-arm, the hands meet
over the breast, pressed together in the attitude of prayer, his scrip,
ornamented with scallop-shells, is suspended, diagonally, from his right
shoulder. The statue is supposed to be a Hastings, at least the family
claim it, and have had their badge—the maunch—sculptured on the wall
of the recess. Among other monuments in the church are those to Robert
Mundy and his two wives, a very curious one to Mrs. Margery Wright with
high-crowned hat, ruffles and ermine muff! and many modern ones. The most
curious relic of mediæval days is an old finger pillory, formerly used
for the punishment of disorderly-behaved persons in church. It is in
front of the screen which separates the nave from the tower. The windows
of the church are nearly all of stained glass, and illustrate scenes in
the life of our Lord.

The town of Ashby is well known for its baths. In the year 1822 they
were opened, but the great expectations of converting the town into a
fashionable health resort have not been realized. The water is not found
at Ashby, but is pumped from deep coal pits at Moira, some three miles
distant, and conveyed to the baths in tanks specially constructed for
that purpose.

Ashby received quite an unusual class of visitors in the year 1804.
During the prolonged wars between England and France many thousands of
prisoners were landed on our shores. According to Sir Archibald Alison
there were no less than 50,000 French prisoners in Great Britain. For the
accommodation of “the rank and file” such places as Dartmoor prison were
erected, but the officers were quartered in different towns. On Friday,
September 26th, 1804, the first detachment, consisting of forty-two
officers, arrived in Ashby, other detachments followed, till about two
hundred found lodgings there, among them were officers of the army and
navy, and about thirty others described as merchants. They lived on
excellent terms with the good people of Ashby for ten years, they were
allowed liberty to walk a mile in any direction out of the town. Some
escaped, and some were exchanged for English officers imprisoned in
France.

Canon Denton, Vicar of Ashby-de-la-Zouch, has written a most interesting
account of its castle, and this French occupation in “Bygone
Leicestershire.” He obtained the information about the latter, from the
lips of one of his parishioners (Mrs. Whyman), who lived at the time, and
saw them. He also had access to a diary kept by an Ashby physician (Dr.
Kirkland). The church registers contain entries of marriages contracted
between the officers and residents, also entries of baptisms and burials,
which, as the Canon writes, “show, among other things, that the prisoners
of war, who were quartered at Ashby, did not allow national prejudices to
prevent them forming the closest ties with the inhabitants of the place
of their captivity.”

Little more remains to be written about this interesting town. Its
Grammar School, founded in 1567 by the Earl of Huntingdon and others,
augmented about thirty years after its foundation, by an inhabitant who
is said to have lost his way, and was guided to his home by the sound of
the church bell. In gratitude for this he conveyed to the trustees of the
school certain property on condition that the bells “should be rung for a
quarter of an hour at four o’clock in the morning.” This custom was kept
up till 1807, when it was discontinued. The property is still known as
the “Day Bell Houses.” One of the Headmasters was Dr. Samuel Shaw, son of
Thomas Shaw, of Brook End, Repton, blacksmith, and was at Repton School
under Dr. Ullock. At the age of 15 Samuel Shaw was admitted as a sizar
at St. John’s College, Cambridge. In 1658 he was Rector of Long Whatton,
ejected in 1661, and was elected Headmaster of Ashby Grammar School in
1668.

[Illustration: Plate 17.

Barrow-on-Trent Church. (Page 99.)

Swarkeston House. (Page 101.)]

On Thursday, July 24th, 1879, a memorial cross, in design like Queen
Eleanor’s cross at Northampton, was unveiled. It bears the following
inscription, written by the late Earl of Beaconsfield: “In memory of
Edith Maud Countess of Loudoun in her own right, Baroness Botreux,
Hungerford, De Moleyns and Hastings, who sprung from an illustrious
ancestry herself possessed their noblest qualities, the people of
Ashby-de-la-Zouch and the neighbourhood have raised this cross as a
tribute of admiration and of love.” The cross was designed by the late
Sir Gilbert Scott, R.A., and executed by Messrs. Farmer and Brindley at a
cost of £4,500.


BARROW, SWARKESTON, AND STANTON-BY-BRIDGE.

One of our pleasantest walks from Repton is to Barrow, down Brook End,
up Monsel Lane, past the (Canons’) Meadow Farm, and, by a field path to
the left, to the river Trent, over which there is a ferry, to Twyford
village. After passing through Twyford, turn to the right along the road,
or by a field path, and the picturesque old village of Barrow will soon
be reached. Barrow, most probably, derived its name from a barrow within
the parish, which parish includes the villages of Arleston, Sinfin,
Stenson and Twyford. Of these villages little can be written, Arleston
has some ancient buildings and ruins which belonged to the preceptory of
the Knights Templars or Hospitallers. Sinfin is noted only for its moor,
on which the Derby races were formerly run. In the year 1804, it was
enclosed by Act of Parliament, and divided among the adjoining townships.

Stenson and Twyford were manors belonging to the Ferrars at the time of
the Domesday Survey, later on they passed to the Curzons, Findernes, and
Harpurs.

The church at Twyford, dedicated to St. Andrew, is a chapelry of, and
held by, the Vicars of Barrow. A Norman arch divides the nave from the
chancel, the rest of the church is of the Decorated period. It has a
tower terminated by an octagonal spire. There are three bells, and a few
mural monuments to the Harpur, Vernon, and Bristowe families.

_Barrow-on-Trent_, as it is usually called, dates back to Norman days,
when it had a priest and a church. One portion of the manor formed part
of the endowment of the bishopric of Carlisle, the other, and proper
manor, including the church, belonged to the ancient family of Bakepuz,
one of whom, Robert de Bakepuz, gave the church to the Priory of St. John
of Jerusalem, Knights Templars, or Hospitallers, who had a preceptory,
as we have seen, at Arleston in the parish of Barrow. For a full and
interesting account of the connection between Barrow and the Knights, see
“Cox’s Churches of Derbyshire,” Vol. IV., pp. 11-19.

When the Order was dissolved in the reign of Henry VIII., the manor
and advowson of the vicarage were granted to the family of Beaumont,
and remained with them till 1638, since that time the advowson has
very frequently changed hands, by sale, or otherwise. In 1638 Daniel
Shelmerdine (an O.R.) was chosen and elected by the parishioners, and
held the living till he was ejected in 1662. The church, dedicated to
St. Wilfred, consists of nave, chancel, north and south aisles, south
porch, and tower at the west end. There are now no remains of the Norman
church. During the reign of Henry III. (1216-1272), the church was
probably rebuilt, and again, in the Decorated and Perpendicular periods,
alterations and additions were made. There are monuments in memory of the
Bothes, Beaumonts, and Sales.


SWARKESTON.

At the time of the Domesday Survey, Swarkeston (Suerchestune or
Sorchestun) was divided between the King and Henry de Ferrers. In the
reign of Edward I. it belonged to John de Beke, or Beck, and Robert de
Holland. Joan, wife of John de Beck, left it to her son and heir. In
the fourteenth century the manor and advowson was purchased by the
Rollestons, of Rolleston, in Staffordshire, with whom they remained till
about the middle of the sixteenth century when the manor passed into the
family of the Finderns. Jane Findern, daughter and heiress of George
Findern, conveyed it, by marriage, to Richard Harpur, who built a mansion
at Swarkeston. This mansion was fortified, and the bridge defended by
earth-works, for the King, by Colonel Hastings in 1642. In January, 1643,
Sir John Gell marched against it with Sir George Gresley’s troops, the
house was abandoned on their approach, but the defenders of the bridge
only yielded after a stubborn defence.

Swarkeston Bridge is the most famous one in Derbyshire, and from end to
end measures 1304 yards. The modern part of the bridge, over the river
Trent, is about 138 yards, the remainder forms a raised causeway, about
eleven or twelve feet wide, with arches, here and there, so that the
flood water can escape. The greater part of the bridge is in the parish
of Stanton-by-Bridge. There is a legend that the old bridge was erected
at the sole cost of two maiden sisters, who lost their lovers when
attempting to ford the swollen waters, to pay a visit to their betrothed
ones. It is also said that the ladies spent the whole of their fortunes
on the bridge, and lived a life of penury ever afterwards.

The earliest mention of the bridge, discovered by the Rev. Charles Kerry,
editor of the Derbyshire Archæological Journal, is in the _Hundred
Rolls_, and is as follows: “Inquisition held at Derby on the Feast of
S. Hilary, in the Church of S. James, anno 3 Edward I. (Oct. 1, A.D.
1275). The jury reported that the merchants of Melbourne passing over the
bridge had for three years withheld passage money and tolls, unjustly and
without warrant, to the prejudice of our lord the King and the borough of
Derby.”

“The Patent Rolls give three pontages for Swarkeston; viz.:—2nd Pat., 18
Ed. II., m. 31.; 1st Pat., 12 Ed. III., m. 26. This latter was granted to
the men of Swarkeston for four years; the collectors of the bridge tolls
being Hugo de Calke, and John the son of Adam. Given at Westminster,
March 1st, 1338. The 3rd will be found in 3rd Pat., 20 Ed. III., which
refers to the ruinous state of the bridge, and appoints John the son of
Adam de Melbourne, senior, and John the son of Adam de Melbourne, junior,
to receive tolls for the reparation of the bridge for three years. Given
at Reading the 28th of December, 1347.” A long list of things to pay
toll, and the amount varying from ¼d. to 6d. is given.

Another inquisition held at Newark, Oct. 26th, 1503, refers to the chapel
on Swarkeston bridge, and a parcel of meadow land, lying between the
bridge and Ingleby, granted to the Priory of Repton for a priest to sing
mass in the Chapel, which had not been done for 20 years.

In 1745 “bonnie Prince Charlie,” the Young Pretender, marched from Derby,
with his advanced guard, as far as Swarkeston Bridge, but on the 6th
of December was compelled, most reluctantly, to commence a retreat to
Scotland, which ended in the fatal battle of Culloden Moor.

The village, now chiefly known as a fishing resort, with its church, and
posting house, is pleasantly situated on the banks of the Trent. The
ancient church was “restored” in 1876, that is to say, it was rebuilt,
with the exception of the tower and Harpur chapel. Beneath an arch,
to the north of the altar, is a raised tomb on which is fixed a large
alabaster slab, on this is carved the effigies of a man and woman, the
front of the tomb is divided into four compartments, in the two middle
ones are figures of seven sons and seven daughters. Round the margin of
the slab is the following inscription:—

“John Rolston Esquire sūtyme lord of Swarkston dysscysyd the iii. day of
De̅c̅ber ye yere of our lord MCCCCLxxxij, and Susane hys wyffe dysscysyd
the 23ᵈ of De̅c̅ber the yere of our lord MCCCCLX and IV on whose sowlys
God have mcy.”

On the south side of the chancel is the Harpur mortuary chapel. In it are
two large raised tombs, each supporting a pair of recumbent effigies. One
tomb is that of “Richard Harpur one of the justyces of the Comen Benche
at Westminster and Jane the wife, sister and heyre of and unto Thomas
Fynderne of Fynderne Esquyer. Cogita mori.”

The other tomb bears beautifully-carved effigies of Sir John Harpur and
his first wife. Over the tomb, on a tablet, is this inscription:—“In piam
posteritatis memoriam et spem certam futuræ resurrectionis monumentum hoc
struxit Johannes Harpur Miles Filius Richardi Harpur armigeri justiciarii
de Banco Regio. Cui uxorem ducenti Isabellam filiam Georgii Pierpont
militis, Deus amplam et fœlicem dedit filios filiasque duodecium quorum
nomina scutis infra præponuntur, Mortem obiit septᵒ die Octobris Anno
Domini 1627.” In front of the tomb, kneeling at a double prayer desk, are
the figures of seven sons, and five daughters.


STANTON-BY-BRIDGE.

Pleasantly situated on the high ground overlooking the valley of the
Trent is the village of Stanton-by-Bridge (Swarkeston). The De Stantons
were lords of the manor for many generations. In the reign of Edward
III., John Frances of Tickenhall married Margaret, daughter and heiress
of John de Stanton, so the manor passed to the Frances family, and
remained with them till an heiress of that house married Sir Thomas
Burdett, Bart., of Bramcote, Warwickshire. About this time the manor was
divided between the Burdetts and Harpurs, each, in turn, appointing to
the living. Now it is in the sole patronage of the Harpur-Crewe family.

The church, dedicated to St. Michael, is a small one, about 60 feet long,
and consists of nave, chancel, north aisle, south porch with a bell
turret on the west gable. The chancel arch, a plain semi-circular one, is
considered to be Saxon, and the south doorway, ornamented with chevron,
or zizag, and billet mouldings, is of the Norman period, not later than
Stephen’s reign. There are several remains of incised sepulchral slabs,
and also slabs of alabaster bearing incised effigies of the Sacheverell
and Francis families. During a restoration in 1865, some of the older
slabs were discovered, and were placed as they are now.

About a mile south of Stanton is a farmhouse called St. Bride’s, supposed
to be once a grange chapel of Burton Abbey. Built into its walls are many
remains of Norman work, and in the yard are stone coffins, and other
fragments of worked stone.


BRETBY AND HARTSHORN.

Three miles south of Repton is the village of Bretby. Like most of the
land round, it used to belong to the Earls of Chester, from them it
passed into the hands of the Segraves, who possessed, among other manors
and estates, Coton-in-the-Elms, Rosliston, Linton, and Repton.

In 1300 John de Segrave received a license to castellate his mansion at
Bretby. Soon after it passed, with the manor, into the families of the
Mowbrays, Dukes of Norfolk, and, through one of the co-heiresses of that
family, to the Berkeleys, who, in 1585, sold it to Sir Thomas Stanhope,
grandfather of Philip, 1st Earl of Chesterfield, and now, by descent, it
belongs to the Earl of Carnarvon.

[Illustration: Plate 18.

Anchor Church. (Page 123.)

Bretby Hall. (Page 104.)]

It is not known when the castle was pulled down, but most probably in the
days of Philip, 1st Earl of Chesterfield (1585-1656), who built a mansion
on the present site, within the park. The old castle stood on the land
to the south-west of the church, the grass covered mounds indicate the
foundations of a very strong fortress, consisting of two courts.

The stones of the castle were probably used in the building of the
mansion in the park, which must have been a grand place, built “in the
midst of a large park, well wooded, and stored with several kinds of
deer, and exotic beasts; several fine avenues of trees leading to the
house, which is of stone, _though not of modern architecture_, very
regular, convenient, and noble, with a very curious chapel, (designed
in the Grecian (Ionic) style, by Inigo Jones), very good outbuildings.
The gardens, after the plan of Versailles, in the old grand style, with
terraces, leaden images of wild beasts, fountains, labyrinths, groves,
greenhouses, grottoes, aviaries, &c., &c.,” the park, with its chain of
fishponds, and fine timber, must have presented a scene of unsurpassed
natural beauty. Amidst such surroundings, an open-air masque, written by
Sir Aston Cokayne, was “presented at Bretbie in Derbyshire on Twelfth
Night, 1639,” before the Earl and Countess and a great company. The
masque is printed in “Glover’s History of Derbyshire,” Vol. II., part I.,
p 184.

In November, 1642, during the Civil War, the house, which had been
fortified by the Earl, witnessed another scene. Four hundred foot, with
a party of dragoons and two sacres, under the command of Major Molanus,
were sent to Bretby by Sir John Gell. They compelled the Earl, and
his garrison of 40 musketeers and 60 horse, to abandon the house, and
fly towards Lichfield. “Then the Countess was asked by the victorious
officers to give 2s. 6d. to each soldier, to save the house from plunder,
but she said she had not so much in the house; they proposed 40 marks as
a composition, to which she returned the same answer; they then offered
to advance it to her, but she declared she would not give them a penny;
then the soldiers plundered the house, but the officers saved her own
chamber, with all her goods.” (Sir John Gell’s M.S. Narrative).

In the year 1780, the young Earl “was persuaded ‘by an artful steward,’
to pull down this splendid mansion and chapel, as being in a dangerous
state of decay, though it was afterwards proved to have been very
substantial.” The gardens also suffered a like fate. Fortunately the
fine cedar of Lebanon, planted in February 1676-7, on the east side of
the house, escaped destruction. It is considered to be the oldest in
the kingdom, and still flourishes, braced together by iron chains, and
is the chief object of admiration to visitors to Bretby and its park.
The present house was begun by the 5th Earl, who died in 1815, when the
building operations ceased. The architect was Sir Geoffrey Wyatville,
assisted by Mr. Martin, the Earl’s architect. A ground plan of the
house is printed on page 187 of “Glover’s History of Derbyshire,” Vol.
II., signed by W. Martin, architect and builder, September, 1828. When
completed it will form a four-sided building, with a courtyard within it.

The church of Bretby, or rather the chapel, for it is one of the seven
chapelries of Repton, was rebuilt in the year 1877, in the place of a
very old building, built in the thirteenth century. It occupies the old
site with the addition of an aisle, which forms a large pew for the noble
owners, and a vestry, both on the north side. The village consists of
a few scattered houses. To the east of the park is Bretby mill, on a
small stream; which, rising in the Pistern hills, runs in a northerly
direction, through Repton, till it joins the river Trent.


HARTSHORN.

About four miles south of Repton is the ancient village of Hartshorn,
which at the time of the Domesday Survey belonged to Henry de Ferrers.
Later on the Priory of Repton had lands, a moiety of a park, and the
important right of free warren over the manor. According to the list
of patrons of the living, various families succeeded to the manor,
among whom are mentioned the de la Wards, Meynells, Dethicks, the
Earls of Shrewsbury, and the Earls of Chesterfield. One of the rectors
was Stebbing-Shawe, jun., (an O.R.,) editor of the _Topographer_, and
historian of Staffordshire. The church, which is well placed on the
higher part, with the rectory on the east side of it, forms a very
pleasing object from a distance, a closer inspection reveals the fact
that, at the restoration of 1835, when the nave of the church was
rebuilt, cast iron windows, imitating Perpendicular tracery, were
inserted! The east window of the chancel, of two lights, belongs to
the Decorated period. The embattled tower is a fair specimen of the
Perpendicular period, and contains a ring of five bells. Three of them
were placed there during the time of Stebbing-Shawe, sen. The other two
are of pre-Reformation date, and bear well lettered inscriptions: “Hec
Campana Beata Trinitate Sancta Fiat,” and “Ave Maria Gracia Plena Dominus
Tecum.”

Under an arch in the north wall of the chancel is an altar tomb, on
which lie alabaster effigies of Humphrey Dethick, and his wife Eliza, of
Newhall. In front of the tomb are representations of their six children,
three sons and three daughters. The father and one son are clothed in
plate armour. Above the tomb is a shield bearing the quartered arms of
Dethick, Allestree and Meynell; at the east and west ends are shields
quartering Longford with Hathersaye, Deincourt and Solney; Dethick
impaling Longford, and Meynell impaling Longford.

Many other ancient monuments used to be in the church, but they have been
“made away with.” There is a fine old parish chest, seven feet long, in
the vestry.

In Vol. VII. of the Derbyshire Archæological Society there are many
extracts from the parish records of Hartshorn: under the date 1612, an
inventory of the church goods is given, the first item mentioned is “a
Co̅m̅uio Cupp of Silver wᵗʰ a plate of silver having Ihon Baptᵈ head
vppon it.” This plate was photographed by Mr. Keene, of Derby, and a copy
of it, with a descriptive note by Mr. St. John Hope, was published in
Vol. VIII. of the Journal. From it we gather the following facts.

The “plate of silver” is a paten of silver-gilt, 5¼ inches in diameter.
The rim is quite plain, with the exception of four narrow lines engraved
on the extreme edge. The centre has a circular depression, which again
contains a slightly sunk sexfoil with the spandrils filled with a rayed
leaf ornament. The central device is a Vernicle, (_i.e._, the face of
our Saviour, as transferred to the handkerchief of St. Veronica, and
usually called a Vernicle). The churchwardens wrongly described it as
the head of St. John the Baptist. Round the head is a nimbus, with rays
issuing from it. There are three “hall marks,” two of which, the maker’s
name, a Lombardic B in a dotted circle, and a leopard’s head crowned,
are remaining; the third, the date letter, is obliterated, so it is
impossible to say, with certainty, when it was made, but as this type of
paten prevailed between 1450 and 1530, the opinion is that its date is
about 1480.

The communion cup bears the London date mark for 1611-12, and the
inscription:

    Justus fide vivet + J + R + C.

    1612.

The letters =J. R. C.= probably stand for James Royll, Churchwarden,
1612, who, with Denis Hashard, made the inventory at that date.


EGGINTON, STRETTON, AND TUTBURY.

At the making of the Domesday Survey, the manor of Egginton was held by
Geoffrey Alselin, and had a priest and a church. The Alselins’ estates
passed, through an heiress, into the family of Bardulfs. Under them the
manor was held by Ralph Fitz-Germund, whose son William Fitz-Ralph,
Seneschall of Normandy, and founder of Dale-Abbey, gave it to William de
Grendon, his nephew. In exchange for Stanley, near Dale-Abbey, William’s
wife gave it, as a marriage portion of her daughter, Margaret, to Robert
Fitz-Walkelin, one of whose daughters married Sir John Chandos. At
the death of his descendant, another Sir John Chandos, one moiety of
the manor passed to his niece Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Lawton,
and wife of Sir Peter de la Pole, one of the Knights of the Shire in
1400, from whom it descended to the Chandos-Poles of Radbourne. Another
daughter of Robert Walkelin, Ermentrude, married Sir William de Stafford,
whose son, Robert, left it to five co-heiresses, and so their moiety
became divided into many shares, which were re-united, by purchase, by
the family of Lathbury. A co-heiress of Lathbury brought her moiety to
Robert Leigh, of Whitfield, Cheshire. In the reign of James I., the
estate passed to Anne, daughter of Sir Henry Leigh of Egginton, who
married Simon Every, Esq., of Chard, Somersetshire, created 1st Baronet
in 1641, ancestor of the present owner, a minor, the 11th Baronet.

[Illustration: Plate 19.

Eggington Church. (Page 109.)

Willington Church.]

As the manor of Egginton was divided into two moieties, so was the
rectory. Dr. Charles Cox thus writes, “Early in the reign of Henry
III., the two moieties of the rectory were respectively conveyed to
the newly-founded abbey of Dale by Amalric de Gasci and Geoffrey de
Musters.” In consequence of this division there were two rectors. The
abbots of Dale-Abbey continued to present till the year 1344, meanwhile
the lords of the manor laid claim to it, and, from that time down to
1712, a series of law-suits were carried on, the result of which is that
at the present time the patronage is in five parts; two turns belonging
to the Everys, two to the Poles, and one to the Leighs. An account of
the various claimants, &c., and a list of the rectors, will be found in
Cox’s Derbyshire Churches, Vol. IV. The church, dedicated to St. Wilfred,
consists of chancel, nave, aisles, and low west tower. At various times
the church has been added to, but it chiefly belongs to the Decorated
period, the tower is Perpendicular, as are some of the windows. In the
south wall of the south aisle are two recesses, one contains an effigy of
a lady, holding a heart in her hand, supposed to be Elizabeth, co-heiress
of Stafford, wife of William Tymmore. On the walls, and floor of the
chancel are memorial stones, and monuments of the Everys, and several
rectors.

There are three bells, bearing the following inscriptions:

    I. “I was recast again to sing
        By friends to country, church, and king.
          Thomas Hedderley, founder, Nottingham, 1778.”

    II. “Ihe. Ave Maria gracia plena Dominus tecum.”

    III. “I sweetly toling men do call
          To taste of meats that feeds the soole, 1615.”
              Bell mark of Henry Oldfield.

The 2nd bell is supposed to be the only one left when the others were
sold for the repairing of Monks’ Bridge. The third bell is of the same
date, and bears the same inscription as the 2nd bell in Repton Church.

The old Egginton Hall, the seat of the Every family, was destroyed by
fire in the year 1736, and was rebuilt by Sir Edward Every, Bart., from
designs by Wyatt. In the Hall there are five splendid pieces of tapestry,
made at Gobelin’s, in Paris, by order of Sir Henry Every, who died in
1709, before the order was completed. Four exhibit emblematic devices of
the four elements, earth, air, fire and water, and armorial bearings, in
each compartment.

_Earth_ is represented by Ceres (Demeter) in her chariot in a garden,
with fountains in the background. By the side of the chariot stands her
daughter Persephone, wearing a mural crown. Lions and other wild beasts
occupy the foreground, the bordering is composed of fruit and flowers.

_Air_ is represented by Jupiter and Juno throned on the clouds. Boreas
blowing up a storm in the background, birds, storks, pelicans, &c.,
occupy the foreground.

_Fire_ is represented by Vulcan working at his forge, attended by Venus
and Cupid, at the back is a cave with a furnace in its recesses. Weapons,
and instruments of metal form a bordering.

_Water_ is represented by Neptune and Amphitrite, in a chariot drawn by
sea-horses. The bordering is composed of seaweed, shells, coral, &c.

The fifth hanging has a representation of Venus, with a little Cupid
standing before her, and has a pretty bordering of flowers, landscapes,
and medallions bearing symbolical emblems, coats-of-arms, adorn the
sides of the hanging. Le Brun, the famous director of paneling at the
Gobelin’s, is supposed to have designed the tapestry. For many years the
hangings were locked up in “a great chest at Hodges’s, the coachmaker, in
Chandos Street,” where they remained till 1750, thus escaping the fire of
1736, they were set up about the year 1760. In March, 1644, there was an
engagement on Egginton Heath, between the Royalists and Parliamentarians,
when both sides claimed the victory.


STRETTON.

Stretton is a little village about 3½ miles from Repton. Its name is
derived from the Latin _strata_, a street, and as the old Roman Icknield
Street passes close to it no doubt that had something to do with its
name. Within the last two years it has become noted to all who take an
interest in churches, and works of art. Following the good example of his
partners Bass and Ratcliff, and other successful brewers, John Gretton,
father of the M.P. for South Derbyshire, has built a most beautiful
church in his native village.

It consists of nave with aisles, central tower over the choir, and
chancel. The east end of the south aisle is separated from it by an arch
and a stone screen, with wrought iron gates, and forms a small chapel.

The east end of the north aisle is used as an organ chamber, with
vestries for the clergy and choir behind it.

A cross, bearing an appropriate inscription, marks the site of the former
church, a little to the south of the present one. No expense was spared
in the construction of the church, and the greatest praise is due to the
founder, architect, (Mr. J. T. Micklethwaite), builder, (Mr. Halliday of
Stamford), and all concerned in the erection of one of the finest village
churches in England.

Where everything is so well done, it may seem unnecessary to call
attention to anything in particular, but the unusual beauty of design and
material of the font, (Frostely marble,) surmounted by its ornate canopy
of oak, the splendidly carved chancel screen, surmounted by a cross of
exceptional size and beauty, (the work of Mr. J. E. Knox, of Kennington),
the stone screen of the little south chapel, the reredos, of marble and
alabaster, in the chancel, the oak seats in the nave, the choir stalls,
the organ case and pulpit, the pavement of the choir and sanctuary, and
the furniture generally call for more than a passing glance. In the
chancel are three stained glass windows, symbolizing our Lord in His
glory, &c., by Sir William Richmond. The tapestry in the chancel was
designed by the late William Morris. The roof of the chancel is decorated
with angels playing and singing “Gloria in excelsis,” the nave roof is
also painted from designs by Mr. Charles Powell, of London.


TUTBURY.

Sir Oswald Mosley, in his History of the Castle, Priory, and Town of
Tutbury, suggests that the name is derived from Tuisco, a Saxon idol. At
the Norman Conquest the town and castle were granted to Hugh de Abrincis,
who held them for a time till he acquired the estates, &c., of the Earls
of Chester, when the King conferred Tutbury on Henry de Ferrariis or
Ferrers, who was one of the commissioners appointed to make the Domesday
Survey. He rebuilt and extended the Castle, and founded the Priory.

His descendant, Robert de Ferrers, joined Leicester in a rebellion
against King Henry III., which ended in Robert being fined £50,000.
Unable to pay so large a sum, he forfeited his estates to the King,
who granted them to his son Edmund, 1st Earl of Lancaster. Thomas,
2nd Earl of Lancaster, was attainted and beheaded after the battle at
Boroughbridge, A.D. 1322. Tutbury Castle fell into a state of ruin, and
remained so till John of Gaunt, 4th son of Edward III., rebuilt it.
The only parts of this castle now remaining, are the gateway, and the
apartments on the north side which were occupied by Mary, Queen of Scots,
from January to December, 1585. Her son, James I., often visited the
Castle, “not,” as Sir Oswald writes, “to indulge melancholy reflections,
but to gratify an occasional delight which he took in the diversion of
hunting. His feelings were not much affected when he surveyed the late
abode of his unfortunate mother, for extreme sensibility was not one of
his foibles.”

King Charles I. also paid several visits to it, and in 1642 the
Castle was garrisoned for him, and placed under the command of Lord
Loughborough. After many privations, the garrison, at last, yielded up
the Castle on April 20th, 1646. By a vote on the 19th of July, 1647,
the House of Commons ordered that “it should forthwith be rendered
untenable.” Its walls enclose a space of about three acres. On the
elevated mound, at its west side, the Julius Tower used to stand, now its
site is occupied by an artificial ruin. A deep moat or foss surrounds
three sides. Within the walls was a chapel, dedicated to St. Peter, the
site of which cannot now be found.

The _Priory of Tutbury_ was founded by Henry de Ferrers, A.D. 1080, and
occupied the north side of the present church, which belonged to it.
On the 14th of September, 1538, it was surrendered into the hands of
King Henry VIII., when its revenue was valued at £242. 15s. 3d. All the
Priory buildings were pulled down, with the exception of the magnificent
Norman nave and west end doorway of the Priory church, which now form the
present parish church.

The town is situated on the west bank of the river Dove, which used to
drive several corn and cotton spinning mills.

To John of Gaunt, Tutbury owed two of its ancient institutions, viz.:—The
Minstrel’s Court and Bull Baiting. The Minstrel’s Court was held every
year on the day after the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, being
the 16th of August, to elect a king of the minstrels, to try those who
had been guilty of misdemeanours during the year, and grant licences for
the coming year. Various, very curious customs were observed, which will
be found in “The Book of Days,” Vol. II., p. 224. The old horn, bearing
the arms of John of Gaunt, impaled with Ferrers arms, on a girdle of
black silk, adorned with buckles of silver, is now in the possession of
the Bagshawes of Ford Hall, Chapel-en-le-Frith.

The Bull Baiting is supposed to have been introduced, in imitation of the
Spanish bull-fights, by John of Gaunt, who assumed the title of King of
Castile and Leon, in right of his wife. A bull was granted by the Prior
of Tutbury, the poor beast’s horns were sawn off, his ears and tail cut
off, and his nose filled with pepper. Then the minstrels rushed after
the maddened beast, and if they could cut off a portion of hair or skin
before it crossed the river Dove, it belonged to the Minstrels, if it
escaped it was returned to the Prior. The proceedings led to very great
rows, and many returned home with broken heads, &c. In 1778 the Duke of
Devonshire abolished the whole proceedings.

[Illustration: Plate 20.

Etwall Church. (Page 116.)

Etwall Hospital. (Page 119.)]

In 1831 some workmen, digging gravel out of the bed of the river, about
thirty yards below the bridge, four or five feet below the surface
of the gravel, discovered “upwards of 300,000 valuable coins,” which
Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster, lost, together with his baggage, when he
was attempting to cross the river, in flood. For five hundred years the
coins, consisting of English, French, and Scottish pieces, had remained
hidden below the bed of the river.

The chief attractions at Tutbury are the Castle, Church, and Glass-Works.


ETWALL AND ITS HOSPITAL.

Etwall is about four miles north-west from Repton, and six miles from
Derby.

The manor belonged to Henry de Ferrers at the making of Domesday Survey,
and included the lordships of Bearwardcote (its old moated farm-house
remains), and Burnaston. Etwall was for a time in the possession of the
Shirley family. In the year 1370 it was conveyed to the Abbey of Beauvale
in Nottinghamshire. In 1540, King Henry VIII. granted the manor, together
with the impropriate rectory, and the advowson of the vicarage, to Sir
John Porte, Knight, one of the Justices of the King’s Bench, father of
Sir John, the founder of Repton School.

The church was granted by Roger de Pont l’Evêque, Archbishop of York,
(1154-1181), to the Abbey of Beauvale or Welbeck, and belonged to it till
it was granted to Sir John Porte, from whom, through his son Sir John,
it passed to Elizabeth, his eldest daughter and heiress, who married
Sir Thomas Gerard, Bart., of Bryn, County Lancaster, “who, on account
of his adherence to the Roman Catholic faith, and alleged complicity in
a plot for the release of Mary, Queen of Scots, was imprisoned in the
Tower of London, as a recusant, during the years 1567-70, and again from
September, 1586, to August, 1588, when he was removed for some months to
an inferior jail, called the ‘_Counter_,’ in Wood Street.” Sir William
Gerard, grandson of Sir Thomas, sold the estate, and the advowson of the
vicarage, in 1641, to Sir Edward Moseley, who, five years later, sold it
to Sir Samuel Sleigh, whose co-heiresses Margaret and Mary, by his second
and third wives, married James Chetham, and Rowland Cotton, of Bellaport,
Shropshire, the descendants of Rowland still live at Etwall Hall.

The church, dedicated to St. Helen, consists of nave, chancel, north
aisle, south porch, and a low embattled tower at its west end. Originally
the nave was separated from the north aisle by an arcade of four
semicircular Norman arches, supported by round piers with indented
capitals, the two arches, nearest the east end, have been thrown into
one, and a pointed arch substituted. The chancel is Early English,
but most of the church, including the tower, has been rebuilt in the
Perpendicular style. The chancel window of three stained glass lights,
representing the Crucifixion, is flanked by two small square windows, a
very unusual arrangement, they are also filled with stained glass bearing
the arms of the Sees of Canterbury and Southwell. At the east end of
the north aisle is the Porte chapel, fitted up with carved seats and a
reading desk for the use of the “master and poor men” of the Hospital.
The seats used to be between the belfry and north door, and the Porte
chapel partitioned off from the nave. Early in the century the partition
was taken down, and the seats removed to their present position. Built
on to the east end of the north aisle is the Cokburne’s memorial chapel,
which blocks up the east window of the Porte chapel. Two of the
Cokburnes were Vicars of Etwall, their chapel was built about the year
1830, it contains several mural tablets, and is now used as a vestry.

Since Dr. Cox wrote his account of the church, a much needed restoration
has taken place. The galleries at the west end, and the plaster ceiling,
have been removed, and new seats, of pitchpine, pulpit, prayer desk, &c.,
have taken the place of the old ones.

There are several monuments in memory of the Porte family. The oldest
one is a brass in memory of Henry Porte, and Elizabeth his wife, and
used to be on the floor of the chapel. It has been taken up, and used to
block up a door on the north side of the chancel. Only the matrix of the
brass of Henry is left, but his wife, clad in conventual dress adopted by
widows, and his children, nine sons and eight daughters, remain. At the
upper corners of the brass are two shields, one bearing a figure of our
Lord, with the “orbs mundi” in His left hand, and the other the Blessed
Virgin, and Child. Of the two shields at the bottom one bears the arms
of Porte, the other has been taken away. Below, on a brass scroll, is an
inscription:—

    “Orate pro an̄abus Henrici Porte, et Elizabeth ūxis ejus, qui
    quidem Henricus obiit in festo Sc̄i Thomæ Marturis.

    Anno Dn̄i M. V. duodecimo quorum an̄abus propitietur Deus.”

“Under the arche that is bytwene the chancell and the chapell, where I
and my wyff had used commonly to knele,” so did Sir John Porte, justice
of the King’s Bench, by will dated January 19th, 1527, order that his
body should be buried. Over the grave a monument was erected, on which
rest the effigies of Sir John, and his two wives, Jane, daughter and
heiress of John Fitzherbert of Etwall, and Margaret, daughter of Sir
Edward Trafford. The tomb has been much mutilated, the heads of Sir
John and one of his wives have been knocked off. He wears his robes of
office, with a collar and pendant. On the north side of the monument
are shields bearing the arms of Porte impaling Fitzherbert, on the
south Porte impaling the quartered coat of Trafford. The Porte motto,
“Intende prospere,” is frequently repeated on the cornice above, and the
various emblems of the Passion are carved among the other decorations
of the monument. Built against the south wall of the chancel is “the
comely and handsome tomb of pure marble” of Sir John Porte, Knt., son of
Justice Porte by his first wife Jane. “Set and fixed, graven in brass,”
are portraits of Sir John, his two wives, (Elizabeth, daughter of Sir
Thomas Gifford, of Chillington, and Dorothy, daughter of Sir Anthony
Fitzherbert), and his five children, two boys and three girls, all by his
wife, Elizabeth.

Above the tomb, on a square slab, is a shield bearing the arms of Porte,
surmounted by helmet and crest. On the tomb, at the top left-hand corner,
a shield Porte, impaling quarterly of Gifford and Montgomery, in the
right-hand corner Porte impaling quarterly of the two Fitzherbert coats.
Below, set in three quatrefoils, are three shields, (1) Porte, (2)
Porte impaling Gifford and Montgomery, (3) quarterly of four, Stanhope,
Maloval, Longvillers, and Lexington impaling Porte and Montgomery.

Below the figure is the following inscription:—

    “Under thys tombe lyeth buryed the Boodye of Syr John Porte
    Knyght sonne and heyre unto Syr John Porte one of the Justyces
    of ye Kyngs Benche at Westmynstʳ Elsebeth & Dorothe wyves to
    the same Sʳ John Porte the sonne whych sonne dyed the syrt day
    of June Anno Dni 1557.”

Etwall Hall came into lay hands after the dissolution of monasteries.
It is a very plain building, built, or rather faced, with stone brought
from the ruins of Tutbury Castle. Nothing worth seeing, but, for those
who admire tapestry, there are two beautiful pieces. One representing
a garden scene, with a pagoda-like building, columns, flowers, fruit
and Cupids. At the bottom the goddess Diana and other figures. Another
piece represents scenes in the life of King David: playing before Saul,
Battle scene, Marriage with Bathsheba. The border consists of a series of
figures, chiefly ladies, with dogs, fruit, and flowers.


ETWALL HOSPITAL.

Etwall Hospital was founded by Sir John Porte. By Will, dated March 9th,
1556, he directed “that six of the poorest of Etwall parish shall have
weekly, for ever, 20d. apiece over and besides such lodgings as he or
his executors should provide for them in an almshouse, to be built in
or near the churchyard of Etwall, and that the money so to be paid to
the said poor should be had and received out of the lands and tenements
thereinafter limited for the performance of his Will.” These lands, &c.,
were in Moseley, Abraham, and Brockhurst, in the County of Lancaster.
The Hospital was built as directed. In 1622, (by letters patent, dated
20 June, 19 Jac. I.), owing to the improvements of the lands, &c., and
consequent increase of funds, the number of poor men was raised to
twelve, and a Master of the Hospital was appointed at a salary of £20.
per annum. It was also ordered that “every day twice the poor men should
repair to the church at Etwall, and there continue all the time of divine
service, and sermon, if any, except for some just cause to be allowed by
the master, and should receive the sacrament three times every year at
the least; ... and that every one of them should have for their stipend
or allowance for every week 2s. 6d., to be paid to them monthly.” The
original building having fallen into decay, the present building was
erected in the year 1681. Built on three sides of a square, on the north
side of Etwall churchyard, from which it is separated by iron rails and a
low wall, the Hospital consisted of twelve rooms and a lodge, where the
Master resided, (_i.e._, a room in the north-west corner, (No. 5),) till
1812, when the “Master’s Lodge” was built, about half of a mile away, on
the road to Willington. A nurse used to live in the room, which has its
entrance from the back yard, at the north-east corner, where there is a
washhouse, &c., her duties were to nurse, cook, and wash for the almsmen
who had no wives. This room is now occupied by an almsman, the nurse, if
there is one, living elsewhere.

Over the door in the centre of the north side is the following
inscription:

    “Sʳ John Port, Knight, son of Sʳ John Port, one of the Justices
    of the Court of King’s Bench, haueing by his last Will left
    an Estate for the Erection and Endowment of a Free Schole at
    Repton and an Hospital in this place, departed this Life June
    VI. MDLVII. the which Foundations hauveing been accordingly
    established, this Hospitall, through length of time falling
    to decay, was rebuilt, the Sallary’s increased, the Alms Men
    augmented from VI. to XII. The Right Honourable Theophilus
    Earle of Huntingdon, the Right Honourable Philip Earle of
    Chesterfield, and Sʳ William Gerrard, Barronet, Heires Generall
    to the Founder, being Governors, MDCLXXXI.”

Over the inscription are three shields, containing the arms of the
governors, quartering, or otherwise impaling, those of Sir John Porte,
over these the shield of Sir John.

The almsmen used to wear blue cloth gowns, with a silver badge on the
shoulder, bearing the arms of Sir John.

In 1825 the number of “poor men” was increased to sixteen, and the four
rooms were added on the east side of the Hospital.


LIST OF MASTERS.

    YEAR.

  1622-1657 [2]Rev. John Jennings, M.A.
  1657-1691 [2]Rev. John Jackson, M.A.
  1692-1712 [2]Rev. Ellis Cunliffe, M.A., Jesus Coll., Cambridge,
                 Fellow, B.A., 1671, M.A., 1675.
  1713-1740 [2]Rev. James Cheetham, D.D.
  1740-1746 [2]Rev. Henry Mainwaring, M.A., St. John’s Coll.,
                 Cambridge, B.A., 1732, M.A., 1736.
  1746-1785 [2]Rev. Samuel Burslem, M.A.
  1785-1809    Rev. Joseph Turner, M.A.
  1809-1821    Rev. William Beer, M.A.
  1821-1832    Rev. John Chamberlayne, M.A., Formerly 2nd Master
                 of Repton School.
  1832-1842    Rev. William Boultbee Sleath, D.D., Formerly
                 Headmaster of Repton School.
  1842-1863 [2]Rev. William Eaton Mousley, M.A., Trinity College,
                 Cambridge, B.A., 1839, M.A., 1842.
  1863-1866    Rev. John Morewood Gresley, M.A.
  1866      [2]Rev. David Crawford Cochrane, M.A., Trinity College,
                 Dublin, B.A., 1857, M.A., 1860. Ox. Com. Caus. 1861.


FOREMARK AND ANCHOR CHURCH.

_Foremark_, or Fornewerke, as it was called in Domesday Book, when it
belonged to Nigel de Stafford. After passing through the hands of various
families, it finally belonged to the Verdons, through the Verdons to Sir
Robert Francis, who purchased it from them. The heiress of Sir Robert
Francis married Thomas Burdett, Esq., of Bramcote, created a baronet in
1618, and it still belongs to that family. It and Ingleby are mentioned
as Chapels of Repton as early as the thirteenth century. In 1650 a report
was made by Parliamentary Commissioners, from which we gather that
Ingleby was to be disused, and Foremark made the parish church. Owing
to the ruinous state of both chapels, Foremark was rebuilt, and Ingleby
was demolished, its wood and stone were used to build the bell-tower and
churchyard wall of Foremark. On the Feast of St. Matthew, 1662, the new
chapel was consecrated by Bishop Hacket.

The position of Ingleby Church, and the reason why it was not restored,
have been clearly pointed out, in a letter, to Dr. Cox, by Mr. C. S.
Greaves, Q.C., “the chapel of Ingleby stood at the corner of a field,
bounded by the road through the village on one side, and by a wall of a
farm-yard on the other, occupied in my time by Browne. It was the nearest
farmyard to Derby. The course of the walls was plainly indicated by the
raised ground where they had stood. When the present church (of Foremark)
was in contemplation, the then Baronet (Sir Robert Burdett) told the
inhabitants that if they would draw the stone for the church, he would
build it wherever they liked; but if they would not, he would build it
where he liked. They refused, and accordingly it was built where it was
most convenient for the Hall, and most inconvenient for Ingleby.” See
Addenda, Derbyshire Churches, Vol. IV., p. 530.

Dedicated to St. Saviour, the chapel consists of nave, chancel, and
west tower, in the later Perpendicular style. The chancel is separated
from the nave by a high oak screen, glazed with large sheets of glass.
The altar, a large slab of grey marble, supported by a wooden table,
is, according to Dr. Charles Cox (from whose “Notes on the Churches of
Derbyshire” these particulars have been taken), the one consecrated by
Bishop Hacket. There are four five-light windows in the east end, and
sides of the chapel. A gallery was erected in 1819.

In the bell-tower are four bells bearing the bell-mark of George Oldfield
with the following inscriptions:—

    I. “Let God arise and his enemies bee scattered. 1668.”

    II. “Saint Savior. 1668.”

    III. “All glory bee to God on high. Saint Saviours.”

    IV. “God save his Church. 1660.”

To the east of the church is Foremark Hall, it occupies the site of
the old hall, “the seat of the Francis family, it was a long, low,
half-timbered structure, with a garden occupying about two acres, in the
centre of which was a large dove-cote.”

In the year 1755 the present Hall was built. To the south-west of the
Hall, in a secluded dell, is a ruined house called “Knowl Hills.” Bigsby
says it was erected by Walter Burdett, younger son of Sir Robert Burdett,
Bart., the first possessor of Foremark. Until the erection of the Hall it
was occupied by another Sir Robert Burdett, Bart. Then a greater portion
of this singularly beautiful retreat was destroyed, but a grove of beech
and lime trees still afford a grateful shade on a lawn where, during the
summer months, “parties” are, or used to be held. There are also some
very curious cellars excavated in the red sandstone rock beneath.


ANCHOR CHURCH.

About two miles to the east of Repton the level meadow-land of the
Trent valley suddenly rises and forms a perpendicular bank, composed of
conglomerate rock, with bands of sandstone. The Trent, which used to flow
close to the bank, now flows at some distance away, the old course is
still indicated by a pool of sedge-girdled water, (close in front of the
rock,) which joins the river a little lower down. The face of the rock
is irregular and broken into picturesque bays, with ivy-covered fissures
between them, the whole crowned with trees, brushwood, and bracken.

Here, ages ago, an Anchorite is supposed to have scooped out of the rock
an oratory and a dwelling, similar to that in Deepdale, (Dale Abbey).
Here he dwelt, far from the haunts of men, in quietness and solitude. Who
he was? who made it? and when? are questions that can never be answered,
the only reference to it is found in the Repton Church Register under
the year 1658. “Ye foole at Anchor Church bur Aprill 19.” In later days
it became the favourite retreat of Sir Robert Burdett, who had it fitted
up so that he and his friends could dine within its cool, and romantic
cells. It has been enlarged at various times, at present it consists of
a series of four cells. Admittance is gained through an arched door-way,
the first cell has been divided into two by a brick wall, plastered over,
a small one on the right hand (10 ft 6 in. by 6 ft. 6 in.) with a small
window, and a larger one (13 ft. by 12 ft. 6 in.) with a window in front,
and two semicircular recesses at the back; between this and the next cell
two arch-ways have been made through the rock, with a pillar between
them, also of rock, this cell is 17 ft. 6 in. by 13 ft. 6 in., and also
has two similar recesses; through another arch the last cell is reached
(18 ft. by 17 ft.), this has three recesses, and two windows. The ground
plan is semicircular, so that the last cell projects some distance out,
and affords most extensive views of the valley of the Trent, and the
country to the north and west, including Twyford and Repton. A little
distance to the west is another cell (6 ft. by 4 ft.) commonly known as
the Anchorite’s “larder.”

The best way to get to the “Church” is, after passing in front of
Foremark Hall, and through a gate which blocks the road, to mount the
hill, and enter a field through the first gate on the left hand, cross
the field diagonally till a grassy glade is reached, which leads down to
a wicket gate on the right, the entrance to the “Church.”


MELBOURNE AND BREEDON.

Melbourne was in very ancient times a royal manor, and is mentioned in
the Domesday Survey as having a priest and a church. It remained in
royal hands, attached to the Earldom and Duchy of Lancaster, till the
year 1604, when King James I. granted it to Charles, Earl of Nottingham,
who conveyed it to Henry, Earl of Huntingdon, from whom it descended to
Francis, Marquis of Hastings, now represented by the Earl of Loudoun.
There used to be a castle here, in which John, Duke of Bourdon, was
imprisoned for 19 years, after his capture at the battle of Agincourt, in
1415. Queen Margaret, wife of Henry VI., is said to have ordered it to be
dismantled in 1460, and it gradually fell into decay, only a few traces
of it can now be seen.

[Illustration: Plate 21.

Breedon Church. (Page 125.)

Melbourne Church. (Page 125.)]

The name Melbourne is derived from Mael-burn, two Anglo-Saxon words
meaning the “brook of the Cross.” A tradition exists that a cross was
erected by the side of the brook, which runs on the south side of the
town, to commemorate the murder of Osthryth, Queen of Ethelred, King of
Mercia (675-704). Later on a small church was erected over the spot,
which was replaced by the present one, “one of the finest and most
interesting Norman churches in England—and the earliest date we are
inclined to assign to its commencement is _circa_ 1090.” Originally the
church consisted of nave with side aisles, central tower, with north and
south transepts, three apses at the east, two western towers, with a
recessed doorway between them. Galleries, supported by groined stone roof
over the western portico, extended over both aisles and central tower,
two spiral stone stairs in the western towers led up to the galleries.
Five “horseshoe” arches, ornamented with chevron or zizag mouldings,
resting on round pillars, 4 ft. in diameter, and 15 ft. high, separate
the nave from the aisles, the capitals are square, with slightly indented
mouldings. The triforium on the north side has triple round arches, that
on the south, of later date, has double pointed arches. The central
tower, on the inner sides, is divided into three tiers of semi-circular
arches. The three apses at the east end were removed probably during
the reign of Henry VII. A square end was then made, and is lit by a
five-light Perpendicular window. The apse arches in the transepts were
built up and a three-light Decorated window was placed in the south, and
a three-light Perpendicular window was placed in the north transept.
Later alterations and additions have been made which certainly have not
added to the beauty of the church, but, in spite of these, the church
remains, as Dr. Cox writes, “one of the finest and most interesting
Norman churches in England,” and well worth a visit.

In the year 1132 Henry I. founded the bishopric of Carlisle, and granted
the church to it as one of its endowments. The bishops built a palace
at the east end of the church, where they lived occasionally. Melbourne
Hall, built on the site of the palace by Sir Thomas Coke, Chamberlain to
Queen Anne, possesses one of the most beautiful gardens in the kingdom,
laid out in the old Dutch style, it affords a favourite place of resort
to many who visit its sylvan retreats during the summer months. They are
open to the public on Wednesday afternoons.

About a mile from Melbourne is the village of _King’s Newton_ with
its picturesque ruin, the remains of an Elizabethan Hall, the ancient
residence of the Hardinge family. About thirty-five years ago it was
burnt down. King Charles I. is said to have been entertained here by Sir
Robert Hardinge. After the King’s departure, some lines were discovered
written on a pane of glass, and signed “Carlos, Newton Regis,” which
accounts for the name. The view from the terrace is a very extensive one,
over the valley of the Trent, with Derby and the high lands of the Peak
district in the distance.

_Breedon_ village is about two miles and a quarter from Melbourne, it
lies at the foot of a singular looking hill which rises suddenly out of
the plain. While all round is marl and sandstone, this hill is composed
of mountain lime-stone. Rising to a height of about one hundred and fifty
feet, it is seen for miles round, and is known as “_the Bulwark_,” and
was once an ancient camp. Its sides have been quarried, and lime kilns
at its base, when at work, do not improve the air. On its summit is a
church, all that remains of a Priory of Austin Canons, built in Norman
times. There is a legend which accounts for its exposed position. It is
said that evil spirits interfered with its erection at the foot of the
hill, and removed the foundations as often as they were laid. In vain
were exorcising prayers offered up, what was done in the day was removed
at night, so the materials were carried up to the top, and the church was
allowed to be built, in it have been laid to rest members of the Ferrers,
Curzons, and Shakespear families. The Ferrers’ pew, separated from the
church by iron bars, surmounted by large escutcheons, is a rare example
of the luxury, selfishness, and exclusiveness which animated the feelings
of “the quality” in bygone times.


MICKLE-OVER, FINDERNE AND POTLAC OR POTLOCK.

The manor _Mickle-Over_ with the three chapelries of Finderne,
Little-Over, and Potlac, was granted by William the Conqueror to Burton
Abbey, and it remained with it till the dissolution of Monasteries,
when Henry VIII. granted the manor to his secretary, Sir William Paget.
Thomas, Lord Paget, sold the manor to the famous Lord Mayor of London,
Sir Thomas Gresham, whose widow married again, and left the property to
Sir William Reade, her son by her second husband. Sir William Reade’s
daughter and heiress married Sir Michael Stanhope, and had three
daughters, co-heiresses, between whom the estates were divided. In 1648,
Edward Wilmot bought two shares, _viz._, Little-Over and Finderne,
which were again sold by Sir Robert Wilmot to Edward Sacheverell Pole
in 1801. The remaining share, Mickle-Over, was sold to Sir John Curzon
in 1648, from the Curzons Mr. Newton bought it in 1789. An ancestor of
Mr. Newton who died in 1619, had previously inherited the manor-house
of Mickle-Over by marriage with the heiress of William Gilbert, to whom
it had been sold by Sir Thomas Gresham. The house is now occupied by the
tenant of the farm.

_Little-Over_ is about two miles from Mickle-Over, and used to be the
seat of the Harpur family, Chief Justice Sir Richard Harpur built the
manor-house, in which the family lived till the days of John Harpur, who
died in 1754, when the property passed to the Heathcotes. In the church
is a costly monument to Sir Richard Harpur, son of the Chief Justice, and
his wife Mary, daughter of Thomas Reresby. The church consists of nave,
chancel, north aisles, and bell turret on the west gable. The blocked-up
Norman doorway in the west end is the only relic of ancient days.

_Finderne_ is a small village, about two miles from Repton. It had a very
interesting old chapel, dating back to its Norman days, but in the year
1862 it was completely destroyed. It must have been like the chapel at
Little-Over. The present church consists of nave, chancel, and tower,
with a spire at the west end. The only relic of the Norman church are the
tympanum of the old south door, carved in chequered pattern, with a cross
_formée_ in the centre, and a recessed founder’s arch in the north wall
of the chancel, which contains a much mutilated effigy of a priest.

The most valued possession of the church is a small chalice and cover,
considered to be the oldest piece of church plate in the county. The
Hall-mark shows it to be of the year 1564-5.

The Vicar of Finderne, the Rev. B. W. Spilsbury, has in his possession a
very curious and rare relic of mediæval times. It is a small sculptured
block of alabaster, 8¾ inches by 7 inches, and 1½ inches thick. There
is a beautifully drawn and painted copy of it in Vol. VIII. of the
Derbyshire Archæological Journal, by Mr. George Bailey, also an article
on it by the Rev. J. Charles Cox.

A little above the centre, resting on a dish, is a head, below it is a
lamb lying on a missal or book. On the right side is a bare-headed, full
length figure of St. Peter, holding a key in his right hand, and a book
in his left. On the left side is a similar figure of an archbishop, with
a mitre on his head, a book in his right hand, and a cross-staff in his
left. The back ground, _i.e._ the surface of the block, is painted a dark
olive green. The head, dish and robes an orange brown. The hair, rim of
the dish, and edges of the robes, books, key, and cross-staff are gilded.
The lining of St. Peter’s robe is red, that of the archbishop is blue.
The head and dish occupy three quarters of the space. Dr. Cox enumerates
ten similar pieces of sculpture, all of which have figures of St. Peter
on the right side, and all, except one which bears a figure of St. Paul,
have a mitred archbishop on the left, which is supposed to represent
either St. Augustine, or St. Thomas of Canterbury. The chief differences
are in the figures above and below the central head and dish. There is
a cut on the forehead over the left eye. Several suggestions have been
made respecting the head. It has been said to represent (1) The head of
St. John the Baptist, (2) The Vernicle, (3) The image of our Lord’s face,
given to King Abgarus, and (4) The First Person of the Holy Trinity.
Which of these is right is a matter for discussion, but “the block, no
doubt, has reference to the presence of our Lord in the Sacrament.”

At the back there are two holes, into which pegs could be inserted, for
the purpose or fixing it above an altar, on a reredos or otherwise, in
oratories or chantries. All the examples known were made about the same
date, at the end of the fourteenth or the beginning of the fifteenth
century.

The Vicar of Finderne also has an old deed, dated 1574, which sets forth
that, in that year, Sir Thomas Gresham sold his property at Finderne,
with manorial rights, to twelve men whose names are given. He had 1272
acres in Finderne, and 378 at Potlock.

_Potlac or Potlock_ was the seat of the old family of Finderns, who for
nine generations lived here (as tenants under the Abbots of Burton),
from the reign of Edward III. to Elizabeth, when Thomas Finderne died, in
1558, leaving all his estates, here and elsewhere, to his sister Jane,
who married Sir Richard Harpur, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas,
ancestor of Sir Vauncey Harpur-Crewe, Bart., of Calke Abbey.

The ancient manor-house, and chapel, dedicated to St. Leonard, have
disappeared. A farmhouse occupies the site of the former, and only a few
cedar trees and Scotch firs remain near the house to connect it with the
past.


NEWTON SOLNEY.

About a mile and a half from Repton, situated on the banks of the
Trent, is the pretty village of Newton Solney. To distinguish it from
the hundred or more Newtons, the name of the ancient owners Solney or
Sulney is joined to it. The manor was held, in the reign of Henry III.
(1216-72), by Sir Norman, who was succeeded in turn by Sir Alured, Sir
William, and another Sir Alured de Solney, who came to the rescue of
Bishop Stretton at Repton in 1364 (_see p._ 52). Sir Alured died at the
beginning of the reign of Richard II. (1377-99), and left a son Sir John,
who died without issue, and two daughters, Margery, who married Sir
Nicholas Longford, and Alice, married three times, (1) Sir Robert Pipe,
(2) Sir Thomas Stafford, (3) Sir William Spernore. During the reign of
Henry VIII., the manor was bought of the Longfords by the Leighs. Anne,
heiress of Sir Henry Leigh, married Sir Simon Every in the reign of James
I.

Abraham Hoskins, Esq., purchased the estates from Sir Henry Every, Bart.,
about the year 1795, and took up his abode there. In the year 1801 he
erected a range of castellated walls, called “Hoskins Folly,” on the
high land between Newton and Burton, as a kind of look-out over the
surrounding country, later on, he converted it into a house and called it
“Bladon Castle.” Mr. Robert Ratcliff is now the owner of the manor and
patron of the living, which is a donative. Besides “Bladon Castle” there
are two principal houses, one occupied by Mr. Ratcliff called Newton
Park, and the “The Rock” occupied by Mr. Edward D. Salt.

The picturesque church, which has been carefully restored, contains
specimens of all the styles of architecture from the Norman, downwards.
It consists of nave, chancel, north and south aisles, with chapels, at
the east end, separated from them and the chancel by pointed arches. The
chancel arch was probably removed during the Perpendicular period.

There are three very ancient monuments of knights, which are well worth a
close inspection.

The oldest of them is now lying under an arch at the west end of the
south aisle, it is the freestone effigy of a mail-clad knight, with a
shield on his left arm, his hands are on a sword, suspended in front on
a cross-belt, unfortunately the effigy is much mutilated, the lower part
has gone.

The second, also of freestone, is under the tower, on the north side,
the head has gone, the figure is clad in a surcoat, girded by a sword
belt, parts of armour are seen in the hauberk, the feet rest on foliated
brackets of Early English work.

The third, on the south side, opposite number two, is a very beautiful
effigy in alabaster, resting on an altar tomb of the same material. On
the sides are eleven shields. The effigy will well repay a very close
inspection, it is one of the most highly finished in the county. From
its head (wearing a bassinet) down to its feet, every detail has been
elaborately worked out. Most probably the monuments represent three
members of the de Solney family, but which is a matter of discussion.

The effigy of Sir Henry Every, Bart., has been transferred from the
chancel and placed beneath the west window of the tower. It is of marble,
and the effigy is clad in a toga and sandals of a Roman citizen, the
contrast, between it and the other two ancient ones, is most striking! On
the front of the monument is the following inscription:—

    “Here lies the body of Sʳ Henry Every, late of Egginton in this
    county, Baronet, who died yᵉ 1st day of Septʳ 1709. To whose
    memory Ann his beloved wife, the eldest daughter and one of the
    coheiresses of Sʳ Francis Russell, late of Strentham, Bart. (of
    a very ancient family in yᵉ county of Worcester) erected yᵉ
    monument.”

The floor of the tower has been paved with encaustic tiles found during
the restoration, they are supposed to have been made at Repton.

Since Dr. Cox wrote his article on Newton Solney Church the restoration,
referred to above, has been made, the whole of the fabric has been very
carefully restored, a new south porch, of stone, has taken the place of
the former brick one, the floor has been lowered and paved with stone,
with blocks of wood under the pews, which are also new, of pitch pine.


TICKENHALL, CALKE, AND STAUNTON HAROLD.

About four miles to the south-east of Repton is the village of
Tickenhall, which was formerly one of the seven chapels of Repton. At
the time of the Domesday Survey its lands were divided between the King,
Nigel de Stafford, ancestor of the Gresleys, and the abbot of Burton.
Subsequently King Henry I. granted it, with Repton, to Ralph, Earl of
Chester. From charters, quoted in Vol. II. of the _Topographer_, we learn
that the Canons of Repton Priory obtained grants of land and permission
to draw a cart load of wood daily from the woods in Tickenhall, also the
right of free warren over the land and fishing in the river Trent, from
later Earls of Chester, and others. From the same source we learn that
the chapel was originally dedicated to St. Thomas à Becket.

After the dissolution of monasteries, the rectorial tithes passed to
Edward Abell, lord of manor of Tickenhall, who died in 1596. From his
son, Ralph, Sir John Harpur purchased the manor and impropriate tithes
in 1625, and they remain in the hands of his descendant, Sir Vauncey
Harpur-Crewe, Bart., who is also the patron of the living, which has been
converted into a vicarage in modern times.

In the year 1841 it was decided, at a vestry meeting, to build a new
church, the old one being so much out of repair. About fifty yards to the
north of the old one the present church was erected, consisting of nave,
with aisles, chancel, vestry, and tower with spire. The picturesque,
ivy-clad remains of the old church in the churchyard, the four-clustered
pillars in the vicarage garden, and other fragments found _in situ_ prove
that the old Chapel of St. Thomas contained portions of Norman, Early
English and Decorated work, and the fact that gunpowder had to be used in
its demolition also proves that a most interesting church, connected with
centuries of the history of Tickenhall, was destroyed. As if to complete
the severance, the name of its patron saint was also changed to that of
St. George, not in honour of England’s patron saint, but after Sir George
Crewe, Bart., lord of the manor, and patron of the living!

Formerly a good trade was carried on in the limestone quarries, but of
late they have been closed. The “caverns” present a most picturesque
appearance, and afford a grand field for the geologist in search of
fossils, which abound in the carboniferous limestone there. There was
also a pottery works, with a kiln, which have also been closed and
pulled down. There is a hospital, founded by Mr. Charles Harpur in the
year 1770, for “decayed poor men and women in the parishes of Tickenhall
and Calke.” It is now only occupied by women. The octagonal brick-built
“round house” still remains by the side of the main street, and forms a
link between the old and the new.

_Calke_ was, as we have seen, celebrated for its “Abbey,” the mother of
Repton Priory. In the year 1547 Calke was granted by Edward VI. to John,
Earl of Warwick. Thirty years later it became the property and seat of
Roger Wendesley, whose successor, Richard Wendesley, sold it to Robert
Bainbrigge, who in 1621 conveyed it to Henry Harpur, who was made a
baronet in 1626. At the beginning of the eighteenth century the present
“Abbey” was built on the site of the old priory, as it ought to have been
called.

The parish church belonged to the Canons of Calke from the earliest
times, and with them was transferred to Repton Priory, with whose canons
it remained till the dissolution of the monasteries, when it passed to
the owners of the estate.

The Parliamentary Commissioners in 1650 describe Calke “as a peculiar
Sir John Harper of the same Baronett is impropriator and procures the
cure supplied. It lyes neare unto Ticknall and may conveniently be
united to Tycknall and the chapell of Calke disused.” There is a seal
of the peculiar, a diamond in shape, with the side view of a man in a
long gown. These words are round the margin, _Sigillum officii pecularis
jurisdictionis de Calke_. As “peculiars” are exempt from the jurisdiction
of the Ordinary or Bishops Courts, no doubt this seal was used for
stamping deeds, &c., issued by the peculiar.

The church is said to be dedicated to St. Giles, who was also the patron
saint of the priory. Sir George Crewe rebuilt, or rather re-cased,
the old church with new stone in the year 1826. Like the windows at
Hartshorn, the mullions and tracery are of cast iron, by Weatherhead,
Glover and Co., Derby. At the west end is a small embattled tower, in
which is a door, the only entry to the church.

The village consists only of a few houses, but it is very prettily
situated.

A little to the south-east of Calke is _Staunton Harold_, the seat of
Earl Ferrers. At the time of the Domesday Book Survey, the Ferrers family
possessed estates in fourteen counties, and no less than one hundred
and fourteen manors in Derbyshire. Their principal seat was at Tutbury
Castle in Staffordshire, where they founded the priory. Robert, the 2nd
Earl, was created Earl of Derby in the year 1138. This title remained in
the family till the reign of Henry III., when another Robert (the 5th
Earl) was deprived of his titles and estates owing to his repeated acts
of rebellion. According to Lysons, the title was conferred on several
Plantagenets. Henry VII. conferred it, after the victory of Bosworth
Field, in consideration of services received, on Lord Stanley, in whose
family it still remains. The present Earl Ferrers is descended from Sir
Henry Shirley, who married Dorothy, co-heir of Robert Devereux, Earl of
Essex, and of the Baronies of Ferrers of Chartley and Bourchier. Their
grandson Robert was summoned to Parliament, by Writ 14th December, 1677,
as Baron Ferrets of Chartley, and was created Viscount Tamworth and Earl
Ferrers 3rd September, 1711. Staunton Harold Hall was built by the 5th
Earl Ferrers. Situated in a lovely valley, overlooking a lake, bounded
by sloping ground adorned with trees, and other shrubs, the house is one
of the finest of its kind among our “stately homes of England.” It is
built in the style of Andrea Palladio (Classical or Renaissance) with a
pediment supported by Ionic pillars, which are upheld with Doric columns.
The material is stone, or brick ornamented with stone. The south-west
front, built in the form of the letter =H=, is surmounted with the statue
of a huge lion. The north-east, or library front, was designed by Inigo
Jones. The entrance gate of the Hall is of most elaborate and beautiful
specimen of iron workmanship. By the side of the lake is a beautiful
little Gothic church, consisting of chancel, nave and two aisles. The
chancel is separated from the nave by elegantly wrought iron gates, which
bear the Ferrers’ arms. From the walls of the church are hung funeral
trophies of the family, like those in St. George’s Chapel, Windsor.

[Illustration: Plate 22.

Tickenhall Round House. (Page 134.)]




FOOTNOTES


[1] _See_ Dr. Pears’ address at the Tercentenary of Repton School, 1857.

[2] Also Vicars of Etwall.




INDEX.


  Abell, Edward. Ralph, 133.

  Abney, James, 26.

  Abraham, 63, 119.

  Abrincis, Hugh de, 113.

  Adda, 8.

  Æadwulph (Aldulph), King of E. Anglia, 9.

  Ælfthryth (Ælfritha), Abbess of Repton, 9.

  Æthelbald, King of Mercia, 9, 11, 14.

  Æthelred, 11.

  Agincourt, Battle of, 125.

  Alfreton, 52.

  Alfred, brother of Oswiu, 8.

  Algar, Earl of Mercia, 3, 9, 50.

  Alison, Sir Archibald, 97.

  Allen’s Close, 5.

  Alselin, Geoffrey, 108.

  “Anchor Church,” 123-4.

  Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, 6, 9.

  Anne, Queen, 126.

  Anne, wife of James I., 94.

  Arleston, 99.

  Armour of Repton, 32.

  Ashby-de-la-Zouch, 92-9.
    Castle, 93.
    Church, 96.

  Askew Hill, 91.

  Astley, William, 24.

  Augmentation Office Book, 53.

  Augustine, St., 50, 129.


  Badow Church, 52.

  Bainbrigge, William, 96.
    Robert, 134.

  Baine, Ralph, Bishop of Lichfield, 63.

  Bailey, George, 128.

  Bakepuz, Robert de, 100.

  Bakewell Church, 74.

  Bangor, 2.

  Bardulfs, 108.

  Barker, Robert, 37.

  Barnack Church, 19.

  Barrow-on-Trent, 99-100.

  Bartholomew, St., 12, 14.

  Basano’s Church Notes, 20.

  Bath School, 61.

  Beaconsfield, Earl of, 98.

  Beaumeis, Philip de. Robert, 92.

  Beaumont, Sir George, 92.

  Beauvale (Welbeck), Abbey of, 115.

  Beccelm, 11, 14.

  Beck, or Beke, John de, 100.

  Becket, St. Thomas à, 129, 133.

  Bells of Repton, 42-9.

  Bell Marks, 46.

  Bennett, Gervase, 66.

  Berfurt (cousin of St. Wystan), 9, 15.

  Bertulph (uncle of St. Wystan), 15.

  Betti, 8.

  Bigsby, Rev. Robert, 51, 53, 65, 85.

  Birch, Walter de Gray, 13.

  Birmingham School, 61.

  “Black Book,” 53.

  “Black Canons,” 50.

  “Bladon Castle,” 131.

  Blandee, Thomas, 24.

  Block of Alabaster, sculptured, at Finderne, 128.

  Blomfield, Sir Arthur, 23, 85, 128.

  Blundeville, Randulph de, Earl of Chester, 3.

  Bodleian Library, 46.

  “Bonnie Prince Charlie,” 102.

  Bosworth Field, 135.

  Bourdon, John, Duke of, 125.

  Brasenose College, Oxford, 62.

  Breedon Church, 126.
    Hill, 91.

  Bretby, 4, 5, 51, 104-6.
    “Clump,” 91.

  Brewster, Thomas, 63.

  Bride’s, St., Farmhouse of, 104.

  Bridgenorth, 95.

  Brigstock Church, 19.

  Bristol, 95.

  Brockhurst, 63, 119.

  “Brook End,” 4.

  Brotherhouse, 14.

  Bullock, William (O.R.), 67.

  Burdett, Sir Francis (O.R.), 66.
    Robert, 4, 51, 81, 123.
    Thomas, 103, 121.

  “Buries, the,” 3.

  Burnett, Sir Hugh, 93.

  Burton-on-Trent, 1, 4.

  Burton, Abbot of, 129, 132.

  Butler, Earl of Ormond, 93.

  “Bygone Leicestershire,” 98.


  Calke, 134-5.
    Canons of, 10.
    Abbey, 50.

  Cambridge, 12.

  Camp, Repton, 3.

  Canons’ Meadow, 4.

  Canons of Repton, 16.

  Canute, King, 9, 16.

  Carlisle, Bishop of, 126.

  “Causey, the,” 66.

  Cedda, 8.

  Chad, St., 8.

  Chalice and Cover at Finderne, 128.

  Chandos, Sir John, 109.

  Chandos-Poles of Radbourne, 109.

  Charles I., 5, 95, 113, 126.
    II., 69.

  Charnwood Forest, 1.

  Charters of Repton Priory, 51.
    Repton School, 64.

  Chellaston Hill, 91.

  Chester, Hugh, Earl of, Matilda, Countess of, 10, 51.
    Randulph, Earl of, 3, 10.

  Chester, West, 62.

  Chesterfield, Philip, 1st Earl of, 104.

  Chief events referred to, &c., 87-90.

  “Chronicon Abbatiæ de Evesham,” 15.

  Chronicles (Rolls Series), 15.

  “Church Bookes,” 36.

  “Churchwardens’ and Constables’ Accounts,” 30-41.

  Cissa, 11.

  Civil War, 5, 105.

  Clinton, William de, 3

  Cokayne, Sir Arthur, 105.

  Coke, Sir Thomas, 126.

  Coleorton Hall, 92.

  “Communion Cupp” at Hartshorn, 107.

  Conquest, the, 3.

  Conway, Sir W. Martin, 46.

  Cornavii or Coritani, 8.

  “Counter Jail,” the, 126.

  Cox, Dr. Charles, 17, 30, 50, 117, 122, 126, 128, 129, 132.

  Creçy, Battle of, 93.

  Crewe, Sir George, 134.

  Cromwell, Thomas, 53.

  Cross, Repton, 4, 35.

  Crowland, 12.
    Abbey, 14, 15.

  Croxall, 52.

  Crypt of Repton Church, 17.

  Culloden Moor, Battle of, 102.

  Curzon, Sir John, 127.

  Cyneheard, 9.

  Cynewaru (Kenewara), Abbess of Repton, 9.


  Dale Abbey, (Deepdale), 50.

  Danes, the, 3, 6, 7, 14, 17.

  Dartmoor, 97.

  “Day Bell Houses,” 98.

  Denman, George, the Honble., 75, 84.

  Denton, Canon, 98.

  Derby, 1, 63.

  Dethicks, 107.

  Diuma, 1st Bishop of Mercia, 8.

  Domesday Book, 3, 4, 6, 9, 92, 113, 115, 124, 132, 135.

  Dove, River, 8, 114.

  Dugdale’s Monasticon, 8, 51.

  Durdent, Walter, Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, 51.

  Dutton, Edmund, 56.


  Eadburgh, Abbess of Repton, 9, 12.

  Ealdwulf, King of E. Anglia, 9.

  Edgar, the Peaceable, 9, 17.

  Edward III., 103, 130.
    VI., 42, 61, 62, 134.

  Egga, 14.

  Egginton, 108-11.

  Elfleda, mother of St. Wystan, 15.

  Elizabeth, Queen, 130.

  England, 2.

  Ethelbald, King of Mercia, 6.

  Etwall, 62, 115-21.

  Every, Sir Edward, 110.
    Henry, 130, 132.
    Simon, 109, 130.

  Evesham Abbey, Chronicles of, 9, 15.

  Evesham Abbey, St. Wystan’s Shrine at, 57.

  “Evidences, XVIII pieces of,” 35.


  Fairfax, Sir Thomas, 95.

  Felix, Monk of Crowland, 1st Bishop of E. Angles, 11, 12, 13.

  “Feppingum,” 8.

  Ferrariis or Ferrers, Henry de, 113, 115.
    Ferrers, Robert, 2nd Earl, 135.
    Ferrers, Robert de, 113.

  Ferrers’ Pew at Breedon, 127.

  Finan, Bishop of Lindisfarne, 8.

  Finderne, 128-9.
    Family of, 129.

  Finger Pillory at Ashby, 97.

  Fitzherbert, Anthony Sir, 62.
    John of Etwall, 62, 117.

  Flora Lady, daughter of 1st Marquis of Hastings, 95.

  “Flora of Derbyshire,” (W. H. Painter), 91.

  Foremark, 51, 121-4.

  Francis (Frances) John of Tickenhall and Foremark, 22, 103.
    Sir Robert, son of John, 22, 52, 121.

  French Prisoners at Ashby, 97-8.

  Fuller’s Church History, 53.

  Fynderne (Finderne), George, Jane, John, and Thomas, 3, 4.
    Lords of Repton Manor, 20.


  Gaunt, John, Duke of, 114.

  Gell, Sir John, 5, 101, 105.

  Gerard, Sir Thomas, 62, 116.

  Giffard, Sir Thomas, 62.

  Giles, St., 50, 134.

  Glendower, 2.

  Glover, S. (History of Derbyshire), 105, 106.

  Glover’s Mill, 4.

  Godiva, 9.

  Gorham, Rev. G. M. (O.R.), 23.

  Greaves, C. S., 122.

  Grendon, Serlo de, Lord of Badeley or Bradley, 50.
    William de, 109.

  Grentemaisnel, Hugh de, 92.

  Gresham, Sir Thomas, 127, 129.

  Gresley, 1.

  Gresley, Sir George, 101.

  Gretton, John, 111.

  Gronta (Grantchester), 12.

  Guthlac, St., 9, Chap. III.

  Guthlaxton Hundred, 14.

  “Gypsies,” 35.


  Hacket, Bishop of Lichfield, 122.

  “Hall Orchard,” 86.

  Hampton Court Conference, 36.

  Hardinge, Sir Robert, 126.

  Harker, John, 63.

  Harley Collection of MSS., 13.

  Harpur, Charles, 134.
    Sir George, 128.
    Sir John, 4, 55, 103, 133.
    Sir Henry, 4, 134.
    Sir Richard, 4, 101, 103, 130.

  Harpur-Crewe, Sir Vauncey, 24, 130, 133.

  Hartshorn, 106-8.

  Hastings, Francis, Marquis of, 125.
    George, Earl of Huntingdon, 62.
    Sir William, 93.

  Headda, Bishop of Winchester, 13, 14.

  Heathcotes, 128.

  Henry I., 50, 126.
    II., 51.
    III., 43, 130, 135.
    VII., 125, 135.
    VIII., 53, 114, 115, 127, 130.

  Heyne, Ann, 67, 68.

  Hope, W. H. St. John, 53, 81, 108.

  Hoskins, Abraham, 130.

  Hotspur, 2.

  Howe, Earl, 75.

  Hrepandune, Hreopadune, Hreopandune, 6.

  Huckin, Dr., 85.

  Humbert, 9.

  “Hundred Rolls,” 101.


  Icknield Street, 111.

  Icles, father of St., Guthlac, 11.

  Incumbents of Repton, 24.

  Ingleby, 51, 52, 121, 122.

  Ingulph, Abbot of Crowland, 9, 13.

  Infanta of Spain, 39.

  “Itineraries,” 3, 7.

  “Ivanhoe,” 92.


  James I., 36, 75, 84, 113, 125.

  Jennings, John, 65.

  Jewitt, Llewellyn, 42, 72, 74.

  Jones, Inigo, 135.

  Jordan, William, 70.


  Kale (Calke), 50.

  Kenewara, Abbess of Repton, 9.

  Kerry, Rev. Charles, 101.

  King’s Newton, 126.

  Kinton, Godfrey, 66.

  Knights Templars, 99, 100.

  “Knowl Hills,” 123.


  Lancaster, Thomas, Earl of, 115.

  Lathbury, 109.

  Layton, Dr. Richard, 53.

  Le Brun, 111.

  Leigh, Sir Henry, 109, 130.
    Dr. Thomas, 53.
    Robert, 109.

  Leicester, 95.

  Leland (Collectanea), 8.

  Leofric, 9.

  Lichfield Diocesan Registers.

  Lilleshall Abbey, 92.

  Littleover, 128.

  Lindisfarne, 8.

  Lindsey, 6, 9.

  Longford, Sir Nicholas, 130.

  Loudoun, Edith Maud, Countess of, 98.
    Earl of, 125.

  Loughborough, Lord, 96, 113.

  Louis XI., King of France, 93.

  Lyon, John, 61.

  Lysons’ “Magna Britannia,” 3.


  Manchester, 62.

  Manor of Repton, 4.
    Repton Priory, 4.

  Margaret, wife of Henry VI., 125.

  Marleberge, Thomas de, Abbot of Evesham, 15.

  Martin, F. O., 63.

  Mary, Queen of England, 53.
    Scots, 94, 113.

  Masters of Etwall Hospital, 120-1.

  Matilda (Maud) Countess of Chester, 10, 51.

  Measham, Chapelry of, 51-2.

  Melbourne, 124-127.

  Memorial Hall, Pears, 83-5.

  “Memorials of St. Guthlac,” 13.

  Mercia, 7, 8, 9, 15.

  Merewald, brother of Wulphere, 9.

  Mickleover, 127.

  Milton, 4, 51.

  “Minstrels Court” at Tutbury, 114.

  Moira, 97.

  Molanus Major, 105.

  Monastery, Saxon, at Repton, 17.

  “Monasticon”, Dugdale’s, 51.

  “Monks’ Bridge,” 110.

  Mortimer, 2.
    Sir William, 92.

  Mosley, 63, 119.
    Sir Oswald, 113.

  Motteram, Mr., 69.

  Mugliston, W. L., 73.

  Muniment Chest, 65.

  Mundy, Robert, 97.

  Musca(m), Thomas de (Chronicle of), 50.

  Musden Grange, 63.


  Names of old Repton Families, 28-30.

  Naseby Field, Battle of, 95.

  Needham, Col., 95.

  Newark, 52, 102.

  Newton, Alderman Hugh, 67.
    Richard, 24, 127.

  Newton Solney, 51, 74, 130-2.

  Norsemen, 7.

  Nottingham, Charles, Earl of, 125.


  “Old Trent,” 2.

  Osthryth, Queen of Ethelred, 125.

  Oswiu, King of Northumbria, 8.

  Owen Glendower, 2.

  Overton, Prior of Repton, 82.


  Pack and Chapman, 47.

  Paget, Thomas, Lord, 127.
    Sir William, 127.

  Palladio Andrea, 135.

  Parish Chest, 20.
    Map, 2.

  Patent Rolls, 101.

  Peada, 8.

  Pears, Dr., 62, 71, 75, 76, 82.
    Memorial Hall, 83-5.

  Pega, sister of St. Guthlac, 14.

  Peile, Dr., 71, 82.

  Penda, King of Mercia, 8.

  Perryn, Sir William, 63.

  “Pieces of Evidence XVIII.,” 35.

  Pilgrim, statue of, at Ashby, 96.

  Pilkington, J., 3.

  “Pinfold,” 33.

  Pipe, Sir Robert, 130.

  Pistern Hills, 4.

  Place-name Repton, Chap. II.

  Pole, Edward Sacheverell, 127.

  Pont l’Evêque, Roger de, 115.

  Poor Men of Etwall Hospital, 119.

  Port or Porte, Sir John, 54, 62, 115, 118.

  Potlac or Potlock, 119, 129.

  Powell, James and Sons, 23, 112.

  Prior, Dr., 21, 82.

  Priors of Repton, 60.

  Priory of Repton, Chap. VII.


  Randulph, Abbot of Evesham, 16.

  Ratcliff, Robert, 131.

  Rawlins, Rev, R. R.

  Reade, Sir William, 127.

  “Reliquary,” 42, 46, 71, 72.

  Repandunum, 3, 7, 8.

  Repton Abbey, 13, 15.

  Repton Church, Chap. IV.

  Repton Church Bells, Chap. VI.
    Books, 38.
    Registers, Chap. V.

  Repton Common, 1.

  Repton Hall, 81-82.

  Repton Priory, Chap. VII.

  Repton Rocks, 51.

  “Repton’s Saints,” (S.S. Guthlac and Wystan) Chap. III.

  Repton School, Chap. VIII.

  Repton School Chapel, 77-80.

  Repton School _v._ Thacker, Chap. IX.

  Repton School Tercentenary, 75-77.

  Repton Tile Kiln, Chap. X.

  Reresby, Thomas, 128.

  Rollestons, 101.


  Sacheverell, Edward, 127.

  Sales, 100.

  “Saltpeter men,” 34.

  “Sanctus Bell” (St. Guthlac’s), 15.

  “Saxon Way, After the,” 8.

  Scott, Sir Walter, 92.
    Gilbert, 99.

  School Houses, &c., Chap. XII.

  Seccandune (Seckington), 6, 9.

  Segraves, 104.

  Selwyn, Bishop, 11.

  “Severn Shore,” 2.

  Shakespeare, (Henry IV. Act iii.), 2.

  Shaw, Samuel, (O.R.), 26, 98.

  Shaw, Stebbing-, (O.R.), 3, 7, 8, 22, 107.

  Sheriffe, Lawrence, 61.

  Shelmerdine, D., (O.R.), 100.

  Sherwood Forest, 1.

  Shirley, Sir Henry, 135.

  Shrewsbury School, 61.

  Sinfin Moor, 99.

  “Slaughter House Yard,” 70.

  Sleath, Dr., 22, 82.

  Sleigh, Sir Samuel, (O.R.), 66.

  “Sleepy Quire,” 20.

  Smisby, 51, 92.

  Solney, Sir Alured de, 22, 52, 130.
    William de, 130.

  Spernore, Sir William, 130.

  Spilsbury, Rev. B. W., 128.

  Spruner and Menke’s “Atlas Antiquus,” 8.

  Stafford, Nigel de, 121, 132.

  Stanhope, Sir Michael, 127.
    Thomas, 62.

  Stanley, 109.

  Stanton by Bridge, 103-4.

  Stantons, de, 103.

  Starkey, Simon, 63.

  Staunton, Harold, 135-6.

  Stenson, 99.

  Stephen, King, 51.

  Stocks, Repton, 33.

  “Strelley’s part,” 3.

  Strelley, Philip de, 3.

  Stretton, 111-112.

  Stretton, Bishop of Lichfield, 22, 52, 130.

  Swarkeston, 100-3.
    Bridge, 52, 101-2.
    Church, 4.
    House, 101.


  Tamworth, 6, 9.

  Tanner’s Notitia, 8.

  Tapestry at Egginton Hall, 110-11.

  Tapestry at Etwall Hall, 118-19.

  Tatwine, 12, 13.

  Taylor, John, & Co., 23, 45, 48-9.

  Tercentenary of Repton School, 75-77, 82.

  Tette, mother of St. Guthlac, 11.

  Thacker, Francis, 46.
    Gilbert, 53, 54, 64, 65.
    Godfrey, 47, 65.
    Jane, 26.
    John, 24.
    Mary, 4, 54, 81.
    Thomas, 53.
    “Quire,” 20.

  Thorpe, John, 45.

  Thurgaton Priory, 74.

  Tickenhall, 4, 132-4.

  Tile-Kiln, Repton, 71-4.

  “Topographer,” 7, 8.

  “Tournament Field,” 92.

  Towton Moor, battle of, 93.

  Tutbury, 113-15, 135.
    Horn, 114.

  Twyford, 2, 99.


  Ullock, Dr., 27, 65.

  Uttoxeter, 63.


  “Valor Ecclesiasticus,” 53.

  Vaughan, Dr., 76.

  Verdons, 121.


  Wærburh (St. Werburgh), Abbess of Repton, 9.

  Wales, 2.

  Walkelin, Robert, 109.

  Walton, 8.

  Ward, John, F.S.A., 74.

  Waste, Joan, 63.

  “Watchinge and Wardinge,” 34.

  Watson, Mr., 66, 69.

  Wendesley, Richard and Roger, 134.

  West, Chester, 62.

  Whitehead, Mr., 69.

  Whyman, Mrs., 98.

  Wiglaf (Withlaf), King of Mercia, 9.

  Wilfrid, Abbot of Crowland, 11.

  William Rufus, 50.

  Willington, 2, 4, 52.

  Wilmot, Edward and Sir Robert, 127.

  Wimund, father of St. Wystan, 15.

  “Winchester, Statute of,” 34.

  Windsor Castle, 93, 136.

  Winwadfield, Battle of, 8.

  Wirksworth, 9.

  Wistan or Wystan, St., 9, Chap. III.

  Wistanstowe, 9, 15.

  Woodrooffe, Canon, 76.

  Woodyatt, Rev. George, 23.

  Worcester, 2.

  Wright, Mrs. Margery, 97.

  Wulphere, King of Mercia, 8, 9.

  Wyatville, Sir Geoffrey, 106.


  Zouch (Zouche), Alan la, and Roger, 92.

  Zouch (Zouche), Ashby de la, 92-99


THE END.

A. J. LAWRENCE, PRINTER, REPTON.
